Daniel Hernandez (born May 8, 1996), known professionally as 6ix9ine (stylized 6IX9INE and pronounced "six nine") and also as Tekashi69, is an American rapper. His music has been marked by an aggressive style of rapping, while his controversial public persona is characterized by his distinctive rainbow-colored hair, extensive tattoos, legal issues, and publicized celebrity feuds.Hernandez became widely known in 2017 after his feature on Trippie Redd's "Poles 1469" and the release of his debut solo single, "Gummo", which was a sleeper hit. He subsequently released the mixtape Day69 (2018), which was further supported by the singles "Kooda", "Keke" (with Fetty Wap and A Boogie wit da Hoodie), and "Gotti", all of which charted on the Billboard Hot 100. "Fefe" (with Nicki Minaj and Murda Beatz), the second single from his debut album Dummy Boy (2018), peaked at number three on the Hot 100. Despite negative critical reception, Dummy Boy peaked at number two on the Billboard 200 and was certified platinum by the RIAA.In 2015, Hernandez pleaded guilty to a felony count of use of a child in a sexual performance and received a four-year probation period and a 1,000-hour community service order. In 2018, he was arrested on racketeering and other weapons and drug charges. Facing a minimum of 47 years in prison, he pleaded guilty to nine charges including conspiracy to commit murder and armed robbery in February 2019. During the trial, Hernandez testified for the prosecution against other Nine Trey gang members and was sentenced to two years in prison. In April 2020, he was granted early release during the COVID-19 pandemic following fears over his vulnerability to the disease due to his asthma condition. He was put on house arrest for the remainder of his term and was released in early August 2020.
Hernandez briefly maintained commercial success following his release from prison as his singles "Gooba" and "Trollz" (with Nicki Minaj) debuted at number three and number one respectively on the Hot 100. His second album, TattleTales (2020) debuted at number four on the US Billboard 200, while his third album, Leyenda Viva (2023)—his first reggaeton album—failed to make any worldwide chart impact. Due to his role as an informant in the Nine Trey Gangsters trial, several major hip hop figures and personalities have since condemned or ostracized Hernandez, leading to a severe decimation of his public image.


== Early life ==
Daniel Hernandez was born on May 8, 1996, in the Bushwick neighborhood of Brooklyn, New York City to Natividad Perez-Hernandez, a factory worker and house cleaner from Atlixco, Puebla, Mexico, and Daniel Hernandez Sr., from Río Piedras, San Juan, Puerto Rico. His mother came to the U.S. in 1988 to seek a better life and opportunities. Hernandez played baseball and soccer throughout his youth and was allegedly assigned a scout for a major league team at 13 but his mother declined because she did not trust a stranger taking her son at a young age.Hernandez and his older brother, Oscar Osiris (b. August 25, 1994), were raised in a church throughout their youth. Hernandez sang during mass and was selected many times to read from the Bible. His favorite passage was Psalm 121. His elementary school, was Public School 59. His middle school was Juan Morel Campos Secondary School. His high school was Legacy High School. He left high school around the tenth grade.Hernandez did not know his father until he was 9 years old and had only a brief relationship with him. Hernandez's mother told him he was dead, according to Hernandez's father. Hernandez's father had a heroin addiction and was in prison for five years for selling drugs. Hernandez's stepfather, who also was Puerto Rican, was shot dead steps away from the family home in 2010. After the murder of his stepfather, Hernandez's mother was not able to make enough money working to support her children. She applied for welfare and there were many nights Hernandez and his brother went to bed without dinner. Due to his mother's financial struggle, Hernandez and his brother wore used clothes and Hernandez had to share a bed with his mother.Emotionally disturbed by the death of his stepfather, Hernandez would not shower or eat to the point where he lost a lot of weight, he was given therapy and was hospitalized for depression and post-traumatic stress disorder. Hernandez also started to act out due to his stepfather's death and was eventually expelled from school in the 8th grade for bad behavior. Rather than continuing his education, he started working at various jobs such as being a busboy and a delivery boy at a grocery store to help his mother financially.


== Music career ==


=== 2012–2016: Early career ===
Hernandez first decided to rap in 2012 after meeting Peter "Righteous P" Rodgers, CEO of New York record label Hikari-Ultra, when he came into the vegan bodega Hernandez was working at in Bushwick, Brooklyn and asked if Hernandez rapped based on his appearance, stating that he thought he had the image of a rapper and suggested that he rap because of this, along with Hernandez' cadence.Hernandez began releasing rap songs in 2014, starting with "69" in August 2014, "Pimpin", in September 2014 and both "Who The Fuck is You" and "4769" in October 2014, the latter of which was his first collaboration as a lead artist featuring two rappers from the Brooklyn collective Pro Era, J.A.B. and Dirty Sanchez. Over the next three years, he released multiple tracks and videos with titles such as "Scumlife", "Shinigami" (named after the Japanese death god Shinigami from Death Note), "Yokai" and "Hellsing Station", drawing attention for his aggressive rapping style and use of anime as music video visuals. Many of his early songs were released by FCK THEM, a music label based in Slovakia. He adopted the stage name "Tekashi69"; "Tekashi" references Japanese anime, which he was a fan of, while "69" references both the 69 sex position and the yin-yang symbol.Gathering fame as an internet meme for his rainbow-dyed hair, extensive tattoos and rainbow-plated grills, he eventually became an associate of fellow New York rapper ZillaKami, the younger half-brother of Righteous P. They later feuded after Hernandez discovered Righteous P and ZillaKami were going to sign a record deal with Epic, in an attempt by ZillaKami to drop him due to a lack of control over Hernandez, alleged unpaid bail money, the surfacing of misconduct allegations against Hernandez, and a dispute over allegedly stolen instrumentals. Soon after Hernandez began working with Andrew Green a rapper known as TrifeDrew, again, who had previously worked with him on music videos to work on videos again along with music.


=== 2017–2018: Day69 and Dummy Boy ===
"Poles 1469", released in April 2017, featured Hernandez alongside Trippie Redd on YouTube.
Hernandez rose to prominence on social media due to a July 2017 Instagram post that went viral on both Reddit and Twitter. Hernandez's commercial debut single "Gummo" was released on November 10, 2017, and eventually peaked at number 12 on the US Billboard Hot 100. It was certified platinum by the RIAA on March 5, 2018. His next single, "Kooda", debuted at number 61 on the Hot 100 the week of December 23, 2017. On January 14, 2018, Hernandez released his third single, "Keke", with Fetty Wap and A Boogie wit da Hoodie, which also charted on the Hot 100.Shortly afterward, Hernandez announced his second mixtape, Day69. The mixtape was released on February 23, 2018, and debuted at number 4 on the Billboard 200 album chart with 55,000 album-equivalent units, of which 20,000 were pure sales. According to Jon Caramanica of The New York Times, the tape was an outgrowth of the "SoundCloud rap explosion" and was notable for its willingness to deviate from hip hop's prevailing sound. After the release of Day69, two songs from the album, "Billy" and "Rondo" both debuted on the Billboard Hot 100, with "Billy" peaking at number 50 and "Rondo" at number 73.In April 2018, Hernandez released "Gotti", a remix of a feature he did for artist Packman titled "Got it, Got it". The song's video was released on April 16, 2018, and involved footage of Hernandez donating bundles of $100 bills to poor citizens in the Dominican Republic. The song was added to Day69 as a deluxe song and debuted at number 99 on the Billboard Hot 100 before dropping off the following week, making it his sixth consecutive Hot 100 entry.Hernandez stirred up controversy in May 2018 when he was involved in a shooting with the entourage of fellow New York rapper Casanova as part of a feud; this led to Hernandez losing a $5 million headphone deal and being banned from the Barclays Center. After the shooting, Hernandez stopped releasing music for several months, before releasing "Tati", featuring DJ Spinking in June, which debuted at number 43 on the Billboard Hot 100.
In July 2018, Hernandez released his eighth single, "Fefe", featuring Nicki Minaj and Murda Beatz; the single debuted at number four on the Billboard Hot 100 before peaking at number three in its second week, marking Hernandez's highest entry on the chart and his first single to reach the top five of the Hot 100. "Fefe" was later certified double platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America. His subsequent singles, "Bebe" and "Stoopid", also reached the top 30 of the Hot 100.In September 2018, Hernandez signed a publishing deal with LA-based music company Create Music Group.In early October 2018, Hernandez was featured on the song "Aulos Reloaded" with French house DJ Vladimir Cauchemar and "Kick" with Danish singer Jimilian. On November 7, 2018, it was announced that his debut studio album, Dummy Boy, was to be released on November 23, but on November 21, it was announced that the album would be postponed. The album was ultimately released without notice on November 27, on all streaming services. Despite generally negative critical reception, the album became his highest-charting, after debuting at number two on the Billboard 200 behind Travis Scott's Astroworld. While in jail, 6ix9ine was featured on previous collaborator A Boogie wit da Hoodie's song "Swervin", peaking at number 27 on the Hot 100, off his sophomore album Hoodie SZN. The song was released on December 21, 2018, alongside the album.


=== 2019–present: Return to music and TattleTales ===
In October 2019, Hernandez signed a two-album contract for over $10 million with his label 10K Projects for one album in English and one album in Spanish.In April 2020, Hernandez had to request permission from a judge to film a video in his backyard while in home confinement and was granted permission. On May 7, 2020, Hernandez announced he would be releasing a new single on May 8, 2020, marking his return to music and on his 24th birthday. The song, titled "Gooba", was released alongside a music video. According to Pitchfork's Madison Bloom, the track includes references to COVID-19 ("They sick, been hot, way before coronavirus") and Hernandez's cooperation with federal prosecutors and testimony ("Tell me how I ratted, came home to a big bag").Hernandez announced after several delays his next single "Trollz", a collaboration with Nicki Minaj, which was released on June 12, 2020. The song debuted at the top of the Hot 100, marking 6ix9ine's first number-one single. "Trollz" fell to number 34 in its second week, breaking the record for largest position drop from number one in the chart's history, however the record was broken again later that year by Taylor Swift with "Willow". A third single, "Yaya", was released on July 3, 2020. It debuted at number 99 on the Billboard Hot 100 and dropped out of the charts the following week. A fourth single, "Punani", was released on August 2.
The songs are all included on his second studio album, TattleTales, which was released on September 4, 2020. After the release of the album Hernandez lamented the treatment he received from music platforms Spotify and Apple Music with them not displaying that he had released a new album on the main pages of their store fronts and not including him in their playlists which are highly influential on the charts, with him explaining that he views this as the music industry using these platforms' influence to damage him as a result of him cooperating. In November 2020, Hernandez was profiled in a Hulu true crime documentary film, 69: The Saga of Danny Hernandez. While archival footage of Hernandez is featured, he was not interviewed for the film.On February 19, 2021, he returned with the track, "Zaza", notably throwing jabs at Lil Durk and Meek Mill, whom he has feuded with. The song debuted at number 90 on the Hot 100.On April 15, 2022, he released the song "Giné", throwing jabs at Lil Durk again, as well as King Von. The song was also released in collaboration with Giné energy drink, for which 6ix9ine made a new drink with the company.


== Artistry ==


=== Musical style and influences ===

Hernandez's music is generally categorized as hip hop, or more specifically, scream rap, hardcore hip hop, SoundCloud rap, and punk rap, often incorporating elements of drill, heavy metal, hardcore punk, grime, crunk, trap music, and reggaeton. He cites influences including DMX, Tupac Shakur, The Notorious B.I.G., and 50 Cent.


== Personal life ==
Hernandez suffers from asthma.At 18 years old, Hernandez had a daughter, who was born on October 29, 2015, with Sara Molina (b. January 17, 1996). Hernandez has another daughter who was born November 19, 2018, with Marlayna M.Hernandez was raised as a Christian. In an interview with American radio personality Angie Martinez, he stated: "I pray a lot; I always thank God for good situations. Every time there's a good situation, there's a cell in my brain that says: 'Say thank you to God'. ... Before I blew up, for a year and a half—400 and something days—I literally prayed every day while walking my dog Titus. I would pray every day: God, please change my life ... God, please change my life; I'm a good kid. Please change my life. I got a baby; I can't even buy her Pampers ... please change my life, please change my life—and then 'Gummo' came and life changed. And then I was like damn, God is real. I knew if I prayed every day it would work because God is real. And my life has changed."In March 2018, Hernandez conducted a radio interview on The Breakfast Club, alongside Australian pastor Brian Houston. In this interview, the pastor held hands with Hernandez and prayed for him; asking God to help Hernandez make wise decisions and to bless his family.A few weeks before Hernandez headed to prison at the end of 2018, he began dating Rachel "Jade" Watley. She has Hernandez's face tattooed twice on her body.Hernandez can speak Spanish; he sang in Spanish on various tracks, "Bebe" and "Mala" with Puerto Rican rapper Anuel AA in 2018, "Yaya" in 2020, and both "Bori" with Cuban singer Lenier and "Pa Ti" with Dominican rapper Yailin La Más Viral in 2023.
On October 1, 2020, Hernandez was reportedly hospitalized after having an overdose from mixing two Hydroxycut diet pills with a McDonald's McCafé coffee. He has claimed that he came to weigh more than 200 lbs after leaving prison but has said that using the medication had helped him shed 30 lbs since he was released. His lawyer denies the overdose claim.In September 2022, Hernandez became the goalkeeper of the Russian media football team GOATS.In March 2023, Hernandez was reportedly assaulted inside a steam room at an LA Fitness gym in Palm Beach County, Florida. Videos of the attack were shared on social media. Hernandez sustained facial cuts and had to be hospitalized. No one has been arrested for the attack so far.


== Legal issues ==


=== Child sexual performance charges ===
Hernandez was involved in a child sexual performance charge from 2015. In October 2015, Hernandez pled guilty to a felony count of use of a child in a sexual performance. He was charged with three counts of the offense after a February 2015 incident in which he had physical contact with a 13-year-old girl and later distributed videos of the incident online as part of a music video. Three videos are described in the criminal complaint against Hernandez. In the first, "the child engages in oral sexual intercourse with the separately charged defendant Taquan Anderson, while the defendant, Daniel Hernandez, stands behind the child making a thrusting motion with his pelvis and smacking her on her buttocks. The child is nude in the video." The other videos show the child sitting on Hernandez's lap while Anderson gropes her breasts and later sitting naked across the laps of Anderson and Hernandez.In a November 2017 interview, Hernandez claimed to have had "no sexual contact" with the girl and denied knowing she was a minor. Hernandez also claimed to have been 17 at the time of the incident, though the birth date listed in the complaint against him and in his statement to the police shows he was 18.Under his plea deal, Hernandez must obtain his GED, refrain from posting sexually explicit or violent images of women or children to social media and not commit another crime for two years, among other injunctions. If met, the plea deal will give Hernandez three years' probation and he will not have to register as a sex offender; if not, Hernandez could face up to three years in prison. In a January 2018 court hearing, it was revealed that Hernandez had failed his GED test, but had his sentencing postponed until April 10, 2018. The court date was later postponed, reportedly because the court did not have a copy of Hernandez's GED. Prior to his sexual misconduct charges, Hernandez served jail time as a minor for assault and the sale of heroin.Due to his continuing legal problems in light of his plea bargain, the Manhattan district attorney's office announced Hernandez could face up to three years in prison and possible sex offender registration for his 2015 case, but he was instead sentenced to four years of probation starting in October 2018, with one clause being that he cannot utter the phrase "Treyway" in public as it was deemed to promote gang activity, as well as 1,000 hours of community service. On October 27, 2018, two members of Hernandez's entourage were involved in a shooting in Manhattan and were subsequently charged with gang assault.


=== Choking incident at shopping mall ===
On July 12, 2018, Hernandez was arrested in New York for an outstanding warrant related to an incident where he allegedly choked a 16-year-old in The Galleria shopping mall in Houston in January 2018. All charges were eventually dropped after the teenager decided not to take legal action.


=== Robbery, assault and kidnapping incident ===
In the early morning hours of July 22, 2018, Hernandez was kidnapped, beaten and robbed by three armed assailants in Brooklyn. He had finished shooting the music video for "FEFE" (featuring Nicki Minaj and Murda Beatz) when the assailants grabbed him outside his home and pistol-whipped him. The robbers eventually took over $750,000 in custom jewelry and approximately $35,000 in cash. Hernandez escaped from their vehicle and summoned police help via a stranger. He was taken to the hospital. In February 2019, Nine Trey Gangsters member Anthony "Harv" Ellison was indicted for the July kidnapping and assault. On October 3, Ellison was found guilty.


=== Chief Keef shooting ===
On June 2, 2018, Chief Keef was fired upon outside the W Hotel in New York City but not hit; no injuries resulted from the incident. Due to the ongoing feud, Hernandez was confirmed to be under investigation by the New York Police Department for possible involvement with the incident, despite being in Los Angeles at the time. In February 2019, Hernandez pled guilty to ordering the shooting of Chief Keef. Hernandez offered his associate Kintea "Kooda B" McKenzie $20,000 to shoot at Chief Keef.


=== Domestic violence and alleged sexual assault ===
On September 10, 2019, Hernandez admitted to years of domestic violence in a cooperation agreement. A section of Hernandez's cooperation agreement with the government, which had not previously been made public, listed a number of crimes that he committed and for which the government agreed not to prosecute him. On the list, explained Judge Paul Engelmayer, was that Hernandez "admits domestic violence from 2011 to November 2018." Accusations of domestic violence against Hernandez first came to light in early 2019, including a detailed Daily Beast article that featured testimony from the rapper's ex-girlfriend (and the mother of his daughter), Sara Molina, that he beat her over a period of seven years—a timeline that corresponds to Hernandez's own admission, though no names of victims were mentioned in court. Molina told the Daily Beast about numerous incidents of abuse, including one beating in Dubai that left her face so swollen that she says, "I could barely open my eyes."Molina also told the Daily Beast that Hernandez boasted about being a sex addict. Meanwhile, Molina said Hernandez falsely accused her of sleeping with Kifano "Shotti" Jordan, his manager who reportedly recruited Hernandez to become a member of the violent Nine Trey Gangsta Bloods street gang. When Molina denied cheating on him, she says he punched her out of nowhere, driving "a hair extension into her scalp." "I was leaking blood," she said. "There was blood on the hotel pillowcases. He got scared." Molina told the Daily Beast that she did not report the assaults to the police, though she provided the news outlet with photos she said were taken shortly after the attacks, showing bruises and cuts.She continued to detail that Hernandez proceeded "beating me for two hours straight," she claims "He punched me so hard in my right ear I thought I was deaf." Molina describes that Hernandez punched, kicked and choked her, leaving her with two black eyes and multiple bruises. She then went on to allege that he sexually assaulted her next morning, "He woke up, forced me to have sex with him," she said. "I cried."Molina described another incident that took place in April 2017, in which 6ix9ine beat her in a car in front of her daughter, then a year old, who started screaming and crying. Molina alleges that after she questioned Hernandez about a stripper he had been hanging out with, "He dragged me by my hair and slapped me in my face," which resulted in a black eye. Hernandez admitted physically abusing his ex-girlfriend again in an interview with The New York Times in 2020.


=== Trial of the Nine Trey Gangsters ===

On November 16, 2018, Hernandez made his second appearance on The Breakfast Club radio show, in which he notably stated: "There's only one thing I fear in life. No, two things. I fear God and I fear the FBI." On November 18, 2018, Hernandez, his former faux-manager Kifano "Shotti" Jordan and three other associates were arrested. Hernandez was charged with federal RICO and firearms charges, including conspiracy to murder and armed robbery and faced up to life in prison. He was allegedly part of "a violent sect of the Bloods" known as the Nine Trey Gangsters.Hernandez's attorney, Lance Lazzaro, advocated for bail for his client on the condition that Hernandez surrender his passport, pay a little under $2 million for bail and be placed under house arrest, but the judge denied bail, keeping Hernandez in custody, surmising that he may still be a danger to the community even if those bail conditions were met. Hernandez's legal team planned to appeal that decision. He was held at the Metropolitan Detention Center in Brooklyn under general population before being moved to another facility due to security reasons, as Hernandez had multiple altercations with fellow prisoners, including those belonging to the Crips street gang.On February 1, 2019, Hernandez pled guilty to nine charges. He was due to be sentenced on January 24, 2020, and faced a possible mandatory sentence of 47 years in prison. On February 16, a plea deal document revealed that the rapper could avoid jail time in exchange for his willingness to testify against fellow gang members in concurrent investigations. On December 18, 2019, Hernandez was given a sentence of 2 years after testifying against the Nine Trey Gang. Judge Paul Engelmayer gave Hernandez credit for helping prosecutors send several violent gang members to prison and 13 months time served.On December 18, 2019, Hernandez's father showed up to his court hearing after not seeing him since he was 9 years old. Hernandez did not notice his father in the room for the first half of the hearing. His father sat in one of the back rows of the courtroom and spent several minutes trying to get his son's attention. After Hernandez finally noticed his father was in the courtroom, he broke down in tears. His father told reporters he wants to repair his relationship with his son.On March 22, 2020, while serving his time in prison, Hernandez requested to serve the remainder of his prison sentence at home stating he was at a higher risk of contracting the COVID-19 virus due to his pre-existing asthma condition. On April 1, 2020 Rolling Stone obtained a letter to the judge from United States Attorney Geoffrey Berman saying that the government does not object to the release of Hernandez early on home confinement. On Thursday, April 2, Hernandez's lawyer, Dawn Florio, confirmed with XXL magazine that the court decided to allow the rapper to be released from prison and into home confinement. He was originally set to be released on August 2, 2020. His home confinement ended on August 1, 2020.


== Controversies ==


=== Trippie Redd ===
In April 2017, Hernandez and Trippie Redd released their first collaboration, "Poles1469" and in July 2017, they released another, "Owee." Later that year, upon seeing a post from a Twitter account claiming Hernandez was a pedophile following the release of images and information by fellow rapper and Hernandez's detractor ZillaKami, Trippie Redd denounced Hernandez, saying, "I'm sorry brozay (sic), 1400 don't promote pedophiles... If we give niggas clout, we give niggas clout. It was an accident." On November 11, 2017, following a series of barbs the two traded on social media, Redd was attacked in the lobby of a New York hotel and blamed Hernandez and his crew in an Instagram live video.Hernandez later insinuated his involvement in an Instagram live video, saying, "I don't know what's going on, but your chin is bruised up. You can't just be out here calling people gay, bro. Can't be supporting false accusations, you can't be ranting on Live talking about New York. Fuck these niggas talking about, New York this, New York that, like, you just can't do that bro. You should put some ice on that chin, it's bruised up. I feel bad bro... I just want you to be my friend again," before proceeding to sing the hook from "Poles1469". He was referencing a post by Trippie Redd that showed Hernandez holding hands with another man with a caption insinuating Hernandez was a homosexual.In February 2018, Hernandez was assaulted by several men outside a Los Angeles airport shortly after arguing with Trippie Redd on Instagram. Their feud continued to escalate with mutual Internet trolling. Hernandez later accused Trippie Redd over Instagram Live of having pedophilic sexual relations with fellow rapper Bhad Bhabie, who was a minor at the time. Trippie Redd denied the allegations and reiterated Hernandez's conviction for use of a child in sexual performance. Bhad Bhabie also took to Instagram Live to deny the claims, but admitted the two had kissed in the past, saying, "We kissed but it wasn't that serious and he was 17 at the time."However, this contradicts an account given by Trippie Redd to the late XXXTentacion regarding the nature of their relationship prior to it being publicly known. After the dissolution of Trippie Redd's relationship with his then-girlfriend Alexandria Laveglia, known professionally as Aylek$, Hernandez started posting videos of himself with her, hinting at sexual activity between the two. After Hernandez's November 2018 federal arrest on RICO charges, Trippie Redd mocked Hernandez's imprisonment in a video of him dancing to the tune of Akon's 2004 hit single "Locked Up", mimicking a jail scenario.


=== Chief Keef ===
Throughout 2018, Hernandez was involved in feuds with a number of Chicago drill artists from the GloGang collective, including Chief Keef, Lil Reese and Tadoe (Chief Keef's cousin), stemming from domestic abuse and relationship issues relating to fellow rapper Cuban Doll, who was in a relationship with Tadoe but also friendly with Hernandez. The two continued to feud on social media, with Hernandez posting a video of his semi-romantic vacation to Hawaii with Cuban Doll to Instagram, and driving up to Chief Keef's old neighborhood and taunting him, as well as contacting Aereon Clark, known professionally as Slim Danger, the mother of one of Chief Keef's sons, and recording himself buying her designer clothes and verbally taunting him and later receiving fellatio from her. On May 8, 2018, Trippie Redd previewed the song "I Kill People" on Instagram, featuring Chief Keef and Tadoe, which was aimed as a diss toward Hernandez and Cuban Doll.


=== Ariana Grande and Justin Bieber ===
In May 2020, 6ix9ine accused singers Justin Bieber and Ariana Grande of cheating and buying their way to number one on the Billboard Hot 100, after their song "Stuck with U" debuted at number one while his comeback single, "Gooba", debuted at number three for the week ending May 23, 2020. He also accused Billboard of chart manipulation. In an Instagram post, 6ix9ine alleged that Grande and Bieber were using "six credit cards" to purchase 30,000 copies of their song at the last minute.Both Grande and Bieber denied the allegations against them. Bieber would address 6ix9ine's claims of that his streams did not count, stating that "he (6ix9ine) is counting his global streams and this is a domestic chart so only domestic streams count".Billboard also commented on how they conducted that week's charts, as well as commenting that the forecast rankings that 6ix9ine had prior to the reveal was false, stating that they do not distribute any of their rankings to labels, management, or artists.In a later interview with The New York Times asking him if he inflates his streams "through bots or pre-roll ads or dirty marketing tactics", Hernandez stated:

I'll say the same thing I said to Billboard: Who doesn't? Everybody inflates their numbers. Ev-er-y-bod-y.


=== Other feuds ===
Since his early prison release in April 2020, due to COVID-19 concerns, 6ix9ine has been engaged in a number of feuds, with among others, Meek Mill, 50 Cent, Anuel AA, YG, Rich the Kid, as well as Future—the latter notably involving 6ix9ine mocking Future's parental characteristics and Future going on a Twitter tirade against 6ix9ine.Between August and September 2020, 6ix9ine was embroiled in a feud with rappers King Von, Lil Durk and Lil Reese, who called the rapper out for snitching against his former associates. 6ix9ine reacted to Lil Durk who claimed 6ix9ine's record label tried to pay him $3 million to continue their dispute. Rapper Lil Tjay made similar claims.


== Philanthropy ==
In March 2018, Hernandez visited the Dominican Republic to shoot a music video. While there, Hernandez handed out $100 bills to residents in the area. In the midst of his feud with Chief Keef on June 12, 2018, Hernandez visited Chicago's South Side and gave food and cash handouts to local residents. On July 24, 2018, Hernandez announced that a percentage of proceeds from sales of his Nicki Minaj-assisted hit single "Fefe" would be donated to various youth programs in New York. A portion of the proceeds from their 2020 single, "Trollz", was donated to The Bail Project to support people arrested during the George Floyd protests. On October 22, 2018, Hernandez met and spent the day with Tati, an eight-year-old Brooklyn girl terminally ill with brain cancer whose wish was to meet him. Hernandez took her out for a shopping spree.Hernandez has made a significant monetary contribution for the Cristian Rivera Foundation, a non-profit organization founded to raise awareness and support clinical research for a very rare form of brain cancer found in children called diffuse intrinsic pontine glioma (DIPG). According to the founder of the Organization John Rivera, Hernandez has been a supporter since November 2017 and offered to appear as a guest at the 10th Annual Gala on November 14, 2018. John Rivera also stated Hernandez has done many kind acts that have gone without media coverage or documentation.On February 10, 2019, a video surfaced of Hernandez in an anti-violence against women commercial for Romantic Depot, a New York-based sex shop and lingerie store chain. The commercial video was released on Valentine's Day and went viral on TMZ and other celebrity news sites. The start of the video states "In no way does Romantic Depot support Tekashi 6IX9INE's past activities".
After returning home from prison, Hernandez intended on donating $200,000 from the $2 million he had earned from "Gooba" to No Kid Hungry. However, the director of strategic communications, Laura Washburn, declined the donation, saying "We are grateful for Mr. Hernandez's generous offer to donate to No Kid Hungry but we have informed his representatives that we have declined this donation...As a child-focused campaign, it is our policy to decline funding from donors whose activities do not align with our mission and values." Hernandez responded on Instagram, saying "@nokidhungry rather take food out the mouth of these innocent children I never seen something so cruel."


== Discography ==

Dummy Boy (2018)
TattleTales (2020)
Leyenda Viva (2023)


== Tours ==
World Domination Tour (2018)


== References ==


== External links ==

6ix9ine at AllMusic 
6ix9ine at IMDbTerrance Hamlin (born February 10, 1977), better known as 9th Prince, is an American rapper and one of the founding members of rap group Killarmy. He was initially responsible for bringing the various members together, under the guide of his brother. He released his solo debut album Granddaddy Flow in 2003. He is the younger brother of RZA. He went by the alias Madman & Iron Fingers, especially in his early recordings. 9th Prince gets his name from the kung-fu movie Shaolin Prince. He has pushed hard for a reunion album with his group and helped to release a 'greatest hits' album.


== Legal issues ==
On March 15, 2005, 9th Prince was sentenced to three years of prison after second-degree robbery. He was released on June 27, 2008.


== Discography ==


=== Solo ===
(2003) Grandaddy Flow
(2008) Prince of New York
(2010) Revenge of the 9th Prince
(2010) One Man Army
(2011) Salute the General EP
(2018) The Madman's Revenge EP


=== With Killarmy ===
(1997) Silent Weapons for Quiet Wars
Singles: "Swinging Swords," "Camouflage Ninjas"/"Wake Up,""Wu-Renegades"/"Clash of the Titans"
(1998) Dirty Weaponry
Singles: "Red Dawn"/"Where I Rest At," "The Shoot-Out"
(2001) Fear, Love & War
Singles: "Street Monopoly"/"Monster," "Feel It"/"Militant,""Nonchalantly"
(2011) Greatest Hits
(2020) Full Metal Jackets
Singles: "Musical Terrorist", "The Shoot-Out Pt. II"


=== Guest appearances ===
Gravediggaz Goin' On (featuring 9th Prince and Blue Raspberry) The Pick, the Sickle and the Shovel 1997
RZA Fuck What You Think (featuring 9th Prince and Islord) Bobby Digital In Stereo 1998
Cilvaringz Valentine's Day Massacre (featuring 9th Prince, 60 Second Assassin, Shabazz the Disciple and Blue Raspberry) I (Cilvaringz album) 2007
RZA Number One Samurai (Afro Season II Outro) (performed by 9th Prince) The RZA Presents: Afro Samurai Resurrection OST 2009
Caper Lords of Mayhem (featuring 9th Prince and Shutterworth) Lords of Chaos 2017 


== Videography ==
Sunz of Man || 12" Single || Soldiers of Darkness (featuring Killarmy and various Wu-Tang Clan cameos || 1995 Wu-Tang Records)
Killarmy || Silent Weapons for Quiet Wars || Swinging SwordsWake Up (featuring Hell Razah, Prodigal Sunn and various Wu-Tang Clan cameos)Wu-Renegades (featuring various Wu-Tang Clan cameos) || 1997 Loud/Priority/Wu-Tang Records
Killarmy || Dirty Weaponry || The Shoot-Out (featuring Rza) || 1998 Wu-Tang Records
Killarmy || Fear, Love & War || Feel It || 2001


== References ==Jeffrey Mark Alexander (born November 29, 1997), known professionally as 22Gz ( too-too-JEEZ), is an American rapper credited as a pioneer of the Brooklyn drill scene. 22Gz released his first major mixtape, The Blixky Tape, through Atlantic Records in 2019.


== Early life ==
Jeffrey Mark Alexander was born on November 29, 1997, the Flatbush neighborhood of Brooklyn, New York. His father died before he was born. He started his entertainment career on the New York City Subway performing showtime dance routines. He is of Guyanese descent.


== Musical career ==
After releasing the singles "Blixky" and "Suburban" in 2016, 22Gz gained a following from his YouTube videos. "Suburban", produced by London-based drill producer AXL Beats, was regarded as one of the first major Brooklyn drill songs to become popular. 22Gz gained attention, leading him to signing with Atlantic in 2018 and his label A&R helping him getting noticed by Kodak Black  One of his first songs released on the label, "Spin the Block", was a collaboration track with Kodak Black.22Gz released his first mixtape with Atlantic, The Blixky Tape, in July 2019. His follow-up mixtape Growth & Development was released on April 10, 2020, and was co-produced by London-based drill producer Ghosty. Torsten Ingvaldsen of Hypebeast praised the mixtape, stating, 22Gz has "riotous energy, bringing forth aggressive lyrics and militant deliveries that continue to sculpt out his fast-paced rise".


== Legal controversies ==
In 2014, he was charged with conspiracy to commit murder, however the charges were dropped. 22Gz spent five months in jail in 2017 on second-degree murder charges related to a shooting in Miami, however these were later dropped. 22Gz recorded a Facebook Live video from an NYPD holding cell in 2018.In 2019, Alexander, along with four other New York rappers including Casanova, Pop Smoke, Sheff G, and Don Q, were removed from the Rolling Loud concert. NYPD cited "a higher risk of violence" if the artists were to perform. He has beefed with the "Woo's" including rappers like Pop Smoke and Fivio Foreign.
On June 12, 2022, 22Gz was arrested in New York City on attempted murder charges over a March shooting in which three people were injured. He was released on $500,000 bail four days later.


== Discography ==


=== Mixtapes ===


=== Extended plays ===


=== Singles ===


==== As lead artist ====


==== As featured artist ====


=== Guest appearances ===


== References ==Justin Harrell (born December 29, 1984), better known by his stage name 38 Spesh, is an American rapper and producer.


== Biography ==


=== Early life and career beginnings ===
38 Spesh was born on December 29, 1984 in Rochester, New York and began rapping in the early 2000s. He began making appearances on Sirius XM show Invasion Radio hosted by fellow Rochester native DJ Green Lantern in 2008 and was featured in XXL Magazine for his music in 2009.Shortly after his initial breakthrough, 38 Spesh spent two years incarcerated and was paroled to Atlanta, Georgia where he began to pursue a full-time career in music.
Following his release, Spesh began releasing several notable mixtapes and albums with other artists affiliated with his Trust Comes First Music group. Spesh's musical style is highlighted by one of the most unique rapping voices in the game and his strong punchlines. Notable rappers who have worked with 38 Spesh include Styles P, Jadakiss, Fred the Godson, AZ, Noreaga and Kool G Rap. He has worked with several high-profile hip hop record producers among the likes of DJ Premier, Pete Rock and The Alchemist.On September 8th, 2023, 38 Spesh released an album "Speshal Machinery" in collaboration with Conway The Machine.


== Discography ==
Solo projects

2007: Out on Bail
2009: In Custody
2012: Time Served
2014: The Art of Production
2015: The Trust Tape
2015: The Trust Tape 2
2016: The 38 Laws of Powder
2019: 5 Shots
2019: The 38 Strategies of Raw
2019: The Trust Tape 3
2019: A Bullet For Every Heathen
2019: 1994
2020: Speshal Blends
2020: 6 Shots
2020: 1995
2020: Interstate 38
2023: GunsmokeCollaboration projects

2015: Cocaine Cowboys (with Benny the Butcher)
2018: Stabbed & Shot (with Benny the Butcher)
2018: In the Mob We Trust (with Joe Blow)
2018: Son of G Rap (with Kool G Rap)
2019: Loyalty and Trust (with Flee Lord)
2019: Army of Trust (with Trust Army)
2020: Juno (with Che Noir)
2020: Martyr's Prayer (with Elcamino)
2020: Trust the Chain (with Planet Asia)
2020: 1000 Words (with 1000 Words)
2020: Army of Trust II (with Trust Army)
2020: Ways and Means (with Rasheed Chappell)
2020: Loyalty and Trust 2 (with Flee Lord)
2021: Trust the Sopranos (with Benny the Butcher)
2022: Beyond Belief (with Harry Fraud)
2023 : Greenthumb Meets Trigger Fingers (with Vic Spencer)
2023: Speshal Machinery (with Conway The Machine)


== References ==Mark Howard James (October 16, 1961 – October 19, 2023), professionally known as The 45 King and also known as DJ Mark the 45 King, was an American hip hop producer and DJ from The Bronx, New York. He began DJing in the mid-1980s. His pseudonym, the 45 King, came from his ability to make beats using obscure 45 RPM records.


== Life and career ==
The 45 King first gained fame with his breakbeat track "The 900 Number" in 1987. The song featured a looping of a baritone sax solo from Marva Whitney's "Unwind Yourself" (1968). The 45 King signed with Tuff City Records that year and was given a production deal. "The 900 Number" remains his signature work, having been resampled by many artists. He was also featured on the 1989-Hustlers Convention album on the UK label Music of Life, which is considered by many to be hip-hop's first-ever live album.
Using his popularity from the previous release, the 45 King was able to help the other members of his crew, dubbed the Flavor Unit, which included many well-known hip-hop acts including Chill Rob G, Lakim Shabazz, Apache, and Queen Latifah. The 45 King's big break came when Queen Latifah signed with Tommy Boy Records in 1989 and released the album All Hail the Queen. The 45 King did extensive production on this album, and it is considered by critics to be among his best production work. Over the next few years, many other Flavor Unit members also signed with Tommy Boy, and the 45 King frequently contributed to their albums with his productions. In November 1989, the re-release of "The King is Here" / "The 900 Number" peaked at #60 in the UK Singles Chart, his only appearance in a UK chart.In the early 1990s, drug addiction caused him to lose a production deal that he signed with Warner Bros. Records. Around this time, the 45 King released multiple series of breakbeat records (the Lost Breakbeat series, the Breakapalooza series, etc.) and remixed Madonna's Top-10 single "Keep It Together", but he stayed mainly with his breakbeat record franchises.
In July 1990, Manchester-born DJ Chad Jackson sampled "The 900 Number" on his single "Hear the Drummer (Get Wicked)", which reached #3 in the UK Singles Chart. A remixed version was also a minor UK hit in 2007. Jackson was apparently unaware that the song had itself been sampled from the original "Unwind Yourself", as he credited himself, and King, as co-writers of the song.
In 1996, Washington, D.C.-based go-go artist DJ Kool had a hit with the song "Let Me Clear My Throat". It was call-and-response vocals over a chopped half of the "900 Number" beat. DJ Kool did not just sample the track: he also acknowledged the 45 King as the song's originator. The 45 King then remixed the track for Kool.
In 1998, the 45 King produced "Hard Knock Life (Ghetto Anthem)" for Jay-Z. The song was a hit and featured a looped chorus from the original cast album of the Broadway musical Annie. In an interview, Jay-Z spoke on the 45 King's importance to hip hop and called him a true pioneer of the business.Following the success of Hard Knock Life, the 45 King heard the Dido song "Thank You" in the 1998 film Sliding Doors. He looped the sample and added a bassline, then sent the result to Interscope Records. The recording was later used for the Eminem song "Stan", as the rapper interpreted Dido's lyrics as being about stalking.The 45 King died on October 19, 2023, at the age of 62.


== Selected production credits ==
Ghostface Killah - Blood in the Streets (featuring AZ) - Tommy Boy, 2014
Fatlip - The Bass Line - Delicious Vinyl, 2005
Fatlip - I Got The Shit - Delicious Vinyl, 2005
Fatlip - M.I.A. - Delicious Vinyl, 2005
Diamond D - U Don't Owe Me - Dymond Mine Records, 2005
King Gordy - Nobody Hates Nothin' - Web Entertainment, 2003
Biz Markie – Turn Back the Hands of Time –  Tommy Boy, 2003
Dyme - Ladies Are U Wit Me - Interscope Records, 2001
Paula Perry -Y'all Chickens Make Me Laugh - Fully-Blown Recordings, 2000
Big Scoob – Can Du – White Label, 2000
Eminem – "Stan" – Aftermath/Interscope/Universal, 2000
Various Artist Remixes – Rakim – Feeling You; Public Enemy – Bring the Noise, - White Label, 2000
Craig Mack – The Wooden Horse – NY.LA Music, 2001
Rakim – How I Get Down – Universal Records, 1999
Common Sense – Car Horn – Groove Attack, 1999
Peanut Butter Wolf – Run the Line (Remix) – Stones Throw, 1998
Jay-Z – "Hard Knock Life (Ghetto Anthem) – Roc-A-Fella/Def Jam/Universal, 1998
Fanclub Erdberg – Anton Polster Du Bist Leiwand – Mego, 1997
Queen Latifah – Name Callin' – Tommy Boy/Warner Bros., 1996
C&C Music Factory – Do You Wanna Get Funky? (Remix) – Columbia/SME, 1994
Ed Lover & Doctor Dré – Who's the Man – Relativity, 1994
PMD – Thought I Lost My Spot – RCA/BMG, 1993
Diamond D – Best Kept Secret (Remix), Check 1, 2 – Chemistry/Mercury/PolyGram, 1992
Apache – Do Fa Self, Tommy Boy/Warner Bros., 1992
Def Jef – Don't Sleep (Open Your Eyes) – Delicious Vinyl, 1991
Positively...Practical Jokes – Atlantic, 1991
MC Lyte – Big Bad Sister – First Priority Music/Atlantic, 1991
MC Lyte – Kamikaze – First Priority Music/Atlantic, 1991
MC Lyte – Like a Virgin – First Priority Music/Atlantic, 1991
MC Lyte – Absolutely – First Priority Music/Atlantic, 1991
Lisa Stansfield – "All Around the World" (Remix) – Arista/BMG, 1990
Madonna – "Keep it Together" (Remix) – Sire/Warner Bros., 1990
Maestro Fresh Wes – Drop the Needle (Remix) – LMR/RCA Records, 1990
Lakim Shabazz – Lost Tribe of Shabazz (album) Tuff City, 1990
Eric B. & Rakim – "Let the Rhythm Hit 'Em" (Remix) – MCA, 1990
Digital Underground – Packet Man (Remix) – Tommy Boy/Warner Bros., 1990
Queen Latifah – Come Into My House (Mark 45 King Mix) – Tommy Boy/Warner Bros., 1990
Markey Fresh – The Mack of Rap – Jive/RCA, 1989
X-Clan – Heed The Word of the Brother – 4th & B'Way/Island/PolyGram, 1989
Eric B. & Rakim – "Microphone Fiend" (Remix) – MCA, 1989
Salt-N-Pepa – My Mic Sounds Nice (Remix) – Next Plateau/London/PolyGram, 1989
Lord Alibaski – Lyrics in Motion / Top Gun – Tuff City, 1989
King Sun – Fat Tape, It's A Heat Up – Zakia/Profile, 1989
Chill Rob G – Ride the Rhythm (album) – Wild Pitch/EMI, 1989
Gang Starr – Gusto, Knowledge – Wild Pitch/EMI, 1989
Queen Latifah – All Hail the Queen (album) – Tommy Boy/Warner Bros., 1989
Too Nice – Cold Facts (Remix) – Arista/BMG, 1989
Double J – Bless the Funk – 4th & B'Way/Island/PolyGram, 1989
Big Daddy Kane - Set It Off - Cold Chillin', 1988
Chill Rob G – Chillin' – Wild Pitch/EMI, 1988
Lakim Shabazz – Pure Righteousness (album) – Tuff City, 1988
Gang Starr – Movin on, Gusto, Knowledge – Wild Pitch/EMI, 1988
Latee – No Tricks, Wake Up – Wild Pitch/EMI, 1988
Gang Starr – Movin' On, Bust a Move, To Be A Champion – Wild Pitch/EMI, 1987
Latee – This Cut's Got Flavor, Puttin' On the Hits – Wild Pitch/EMI, 1987


== Discography ==
Westbound Beats – Westbound Records, 2023
Back To The Beat Vol. 2 – Redefinition Records, 2015
Back To The Beat – Redefinition Records, 2014
Scion A/V Remix Project – Scion Audio/Visual, 2008
The Cat Jams – Tuff City, 2005
Beats of the Month – Bronx Science, 2000/2001 (November, December, January, February, March, April, May volumes of "Lost Breakbeat" style beats)
Beats for the New Millennium, Vol 1 & 2 – 45 King Records, 2000
Put the Funk Out There – Rock-A-Fella, 1999
Universal Beat Generation, Vol 1-3 – Ultimate Dilemma, 1998 (European label "The Lost Breakbeats" re-release)
Breakapalooza Vol 1 & 2 – Tuff City, 1997
Champain – Tuff City, 1997
Beats Don't Fail Me Now (12" Single) – CLR Records, 1997
Breakamania, Vol 1-3 – Real Tuff Breaks, 1997
Grooves for a Quiet Storm – Tuff City, 1996
Killer Beets, Vol 1-3 – Music Station, 1996
Real Tuff Jazz – Tuff City, 1995
Zig-a-Ziggin ZZ – Tuff City, 1995
Straight Outta Da Crate, Vol 1-5 – Tuff City, 1993
The Lost Breakbeats – 45 King Records, 1993–1996
45 Kingdom – Tuff City, 1990
Rhythmical Madness (with DJ Louie Louie) – Tuff City, 1990
On A Mission (from "One Voice: Pride") – Ruffhouse, 1990
The 45 King Presents: The Flavor Unit – Tuff City, 1990
Master of the Game – Tuff City, 1989
The King is Here (with Markey Fresh) (12" Single) – Tuff City, 1989
Red, Black, and Green (with Lakim Shabazz) (12" Single) – Tuff City, 1989
When a Wise Man Speaks/Catching a 'Tude/Rocking With Tony H (12" Single) – Tuff City, 1989
The 900 Number EP – Tuff City, 1987
Funky Beats '84 – 45 King, 1984
Just Beats – 45 King, 1987


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
The 45 King discography at Discogs
The 45 King at IMDb
The Unkut InterviewCurtis James Jackson III (born July 6, 1975), known professionally as 50 Cent, is an American rapper, actor, television producer, and businessman. Born in the South Jamaica neighborhood of Queens, Jackson began pursuing a musical career in 1996. In early 2000, he recorded his "debut" album Power of the Dollar for Columbia Records, however he was struck by nine bullets during a shooting in May of that year, causing its release to be cancelled and Jackson to be dropped from the label. In 2002, Jackson released the mixtape Guess Who's Back?, and was thereafter discovered by Eminem and signed to his label Shady Records, under the aegis of Dr. Dre's Aftermath Entertainment and Interscope Records.His first major-label album Get Rich or Die Tryin' (2003), was released to critical and commercial acclaim. The album spawned the Billboard Hot 100 number one singles "In da Club" and "21 Questions" (featuring Nate Dogg), and was certified 9× Platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). That same year, he founded G-Unit Records, signing his G-Unit associates Young Buck, Lloyd Banks and Tony Yayo; prior to becoming the de facto leader of the East Coast hip hop group G-Unit. 50 Cent had similar commercial and critical success with his second album, The Massacre (2005), which contained his third number-one single "Candy Shop" (featuring Olivia). He then adopted a lighter, pop rap derivative tone for his third and fourth albums, Curtis (2007) and Before I Self Destruct (2009)—which were met with stagnate commercial reception and mixed reviews—and aimed for a return to his roots with his fifth album, Animal Ambition (2014). He executive-produced and starred in the television series Power (2014–2020) and is slated to produce its spin-offs.50 Cent has sold over 30 million albums worldwide and won several awards, including a Grammy Award, a Primetime Emmy Award, thirteen Billboard Music Awards, six World Music Awards, three American Music Awards and four BET Awards. As an actor, Jackson appeared in the semi-autobiographical film Get Rich or Die Tryin' (2005), the war film Home of the Brave (2006), and the crime thriller film Righteous Kill (2008). Billboard ranked 50 Cent as the 17th best rapper of all time on their '50 Greatest rappers' list (2023); and named him the sixth top artist of the 2000s decade. Rolling Stone ranked Get Rich or Die Tryin' and "In da Club" in its lists of the "100 Best Albums of the 2000s" and "100 Best Songs of the 2000s" at numbers 37 and 13, respectively.


== Early life ==
Jackson was born in the borough of Queens, New York City, and raised in its South Jamaica neighborhood by his mother Sabrina. A drug dealer, Sabrina raised Jackson until she died in a fire when Jackson was 8. Jackson revealed in an interview that his mother was a lesbian. After his mother's death and his father's departure, Jackson was raised by his grandparents.He began boxing at about age 11, and when he was 14, a neighbor opened a boxing gym for local youth. "When I wasn't killing time in school, I was sparring in the gym or selling crack on the strip," Jackson remembered. He sold crack during primary school. "I was competitive in the ring and hip-hop is competitive too ... I think rappers condition themselves like boxers, so they all kind of feel like they're the champ."At age 12, Jackson began dealing narcotics when his grandparents thought he was in after-school programs, and brought guns and drug money to school. In the tenth grade, he was caught by metal detectors at Andrew Jackson High School: "I was embarrassed that I got arrested like that ... After I got arrested I stopped hiding it. I was telling my grandmother [openly], 'I sell drugs.'"
On June 29, 1994, Jackson was arrested for selling four vials of cocaine to an undercover police officer. He was arrested again three weeks later, when police searched his home and found heroin, ten ounces of crack cocaine, and a starting pistol. Although Jackson was sentenced to three to nine years in prison, he served six months in a boot camp and earned his GED. He has said that he did not use cocaine himself. Jackson adopted the nickname "50 Cent" as a metaphor for change. The name was inspired by Kelvin Martin, a 1980s Brooklyn robber known as "50 Cent"; Jackson chose it "because it says everything I want it to say. I'm the same kind of person 50 Cent was. I provide for myself by any means."


== Career ==


=== 1996–2002: Rise to fame, shooting, and early mixtapes ===
Jackson began rapping in a friend's basement, where he used turntables to record over instrumentals. In 1996, a friend introduced him to Jam Master Jay of Run-DMC, who was establishing Jam Master Jay Records. Jay taught him how to count bars, write choruses, structure songs, and make records. Jackson's first appearance was on "React" with Onyx, for their 1998 album Shut 'Em Down. He credited Jam Master Jay for improving his ability to write hooks, and Jay produced Jackson's first (unreleased) album. In 1999, after Jackson left Jam Master Jay, the platinum-selling producers Trackmasters signed him to Columbia Records. They sent him to an upstate New York studio, where he produced thirty-six songs in two weeks; eighteen were included on his 2000 album, Power of the Dollar. Jackson founded Hollow Point Entertainment with former G-Unit member Bang 'Em Smurf.Jackson's popularity began to grow after the successful, controversial underground single "How to Rob", which he wrote in a half-hour car ride to a studio. The track comically describes how he would rob famous artists. Jackson explained the song's rationale: "There's a hundred artists on that label, you gotta separate yourself from that group and make yourself relevant". Rappers Jay-Z, Kurupt, Sticky Fingaz, Big Pun, DMX, Wyclef Jean, and the Wu-Tang Clan responded to the track, and Nas invited Jackson to join him on his Nastradamus tour. Although "How to Rob" was intended to be released with "Thug Love" (with Destiny's Child), two days before he was scheduled to film the "Thug Love" music video, Jackson was shot and hospitalized.On May 24, 2000, Jackson was attacked by a gunman outside his grandmother's former home in South Jamaica. After getting into a friend's car, he was asked to return to the house to get some jewelry; his son was in the house, and his grandmother was in the front yard. Jackson returned to the back seat of the car, and another car pulled up nearby; an assailant walked up and fired nine shots at close range with a 9mm handgun. Jackson was shot in the hand, arm, hip, both legs, chest, and left cheek. His facial wound resulted in a swollen tongue, the loss of a wisdom tooth and a slightly slurred voice; his friend was wounded in the hand. They were driven to a hospital, where Jackson spent thirteen days. The alleged attacker, Darryl "Homicide" Baum, Mike Tyson's close friend and bodyguard, was killed three weeks later.Jackson recalled the shooting: "It happens so fast that you don't even get a chance to shoot back .... I was scared the whole time ... I was looking in the rear-view mirror like, 'Oh shit, somebody shot me in the face! It burns, burns, burns.'" In his autobiography, From Pieces to Weight: Once upon a Time in Southside Queens, he wrote: "After I got shot nine times at close range and didn't die, I started to think that I must have a purpose in life ... How much more damage could that shell have done? Give me an inch in this direction or that one, and I'm gone". Jackson used a walker for six weeks and fully recovered after five months. When he left the hospital he stayed in the Poconos with his girlfriend and son, and his workout regime helped him develop a muscular physique.In the hospital Jackson signed a publishing deal with Columbia Records before he was dropped from the label and blacklisted by the recording industry because of his song, "Ghetto Qu'ran". Unable to work in a U.S. studio, he went to Canada. With business partner Sha Money XL, Jackson recorded over thirty songs for mixtapes to build a reputation. In a HitQuarters interview, Marc Labelle of Shady Records A&R said that Jackson used the mixtape circuit to his advantage: "He took all the hottest beats from every artist and flipped them with better hooks. They then got into all the markets on the mixtapes and all the mixtape DJs were messing with them." Jackson's popularity increased, and in 2002 he released the mixtape Guess Who's Back?. He then released 50 Cent Is the Future backed by G-Unit, a mixtape revisiting material by Jay-Z and Raphael Saadiq.


=== 2002–2007: Mainstream breakthrough, Get Rich or Die Tryin', and The Massacre ===
In 2002, Eminem heard Jackson's Guess Who's Back? CD, received from Jackson's attorney (who was working with Eminem's manager, Paul Rosenberg). Impressed, Eminem invited Jackson to fly to Los Angeles and introduced him to Dr. Dre. After signing a $1 million record deal, Jackson released No Mercy, No Fear. The mixtape featured one new track, "Wanksta", which appeared on Eminem's 8 Mile soundtrack. Jackson was also signed by Violator Management and Sha Money XL's Money Management Group.50 Cent released his debut album, Get Rich or Die Tryin' (described by AllMusic as "probably the most hyped debut album by a rap artist in about a decade"), in February 2003. Rolling Stone noted its "dark synth grooves, buzzy keyboards and a persistently funky bounce", with Jackson complementing the production in "an unflappable, laid-back flow". It debuted at number one on the Billboard 200, selling 872,000 copies in its first four days. The lead single, "In da Club" (noted by The Source for its "blaring horns, funky organs, guitar riffs and sparse hand claps"), set a Billboard record as the most listened-to song in radio history within a week.
Interscope began funding and distributing for Jackson's label, G-Unit Records, in 2003. He signed Lloyd Banks, Tony Yayo and Young Buck as members of G-Unit, and The Game was later signed in a joint venture with Dr. Dre's Aftermath Entertainment. 50 Cent executive produced Lloyd Banks's June 2004 debut studio album, The Hunger for More, which achieved Platinum status in America. 50 Cent also contributed vocals to Lloyd Banks's hit single, "On Fire".  In March 2005, 50 Cent's second commercial album, The Massacre, sold 1.14 million copies in its first four days (the highest in an abbreviated sales cycle) and was number one on the Billboard 200 for six weeks. He was the first solo artist with three singles in the Billboard top five in the same week with "Candy Shop", "Disco Inferno" and "How We Do". According to Rolling Stone, "50's secret weapon is his singing voice - the deceptively amateur-sounding tenor croon that he deploys on almost every chorus". 50 Cent's video game, 50 Cent: Bulletproof was released in November 2005. 50 Cent portrays himself and provides his likeness and voice in the video game, with the video game also featuring music from his first two studio albums.
After The Game's departure Jackson signed Olivia and rap veterans Mobb Deep to G-Unit Records, with Spider Loc, M.O.P., 40 Glocc and Young Hot Rod later joining the label, who all eventually departed the label. Jackson expressed an interest in working with rappers other than G-Unit, such as Lil' Scrappy of BME, LL Cool J of Def Jam, Mase of Bad Boy and Freeway of Roc-A-Fella, and recorded with several.


=== 2007–2010: Curtis, sales battle with Kanye West, and Before I Self Destruct ===
In September 2007, 50 Cent released his third album, Curtis, which was inspired by his life before Get Rich or Die Tryin'. It debuted at number two on the Billboard 200, selling 691,000 copies during its first week. It sold behind Kanye West's Graduation, released the same day; the outcome of this highly-publicized sales battle between Jackson and West has been accredited to the commercial decline of the gangsta rap and "bling era" style that previously dominated mainstream hip-hop.On the September 10, 2008, episode of Total Request Live, Jackson said his fourth studio album, Before I Self Destruct, would be "done and released in November". He released "Ok, You're Right", produced by Dr. Dre for Before I Self Destruct, on May 18, 2009, and was scheduled to appear in a fall 2009 episode of VH1's Behind the Music. On September 3, 2009, Jackson posted a video  for the Soundkillers' Phoenix- produced track, "Flight 187", introducing his mixtape and book (The 50th Law). The song, with lyrics inspiring speculation about tension between Jackson and Jay-Z, was a bonus track on the iTunes version of Before I Self Destruct. Before I Self Destruct was released on November 9, 2009.


=== 2010–2015: New musical directions, new business ventures, and Animal Ambition ===
In a Contactmusic.com interview, Jackson said he was working on a Eurodance album, Black Magic, inspired by European nightclubs: "First they played hip-hop which suddenly changed to uptempo songs, known as Eurodance". He later said he had changed his next album to The Return of the Heartless Monster after writing different material when he returned home from the Invitation Tour in 2010, shelving Black Magic. On September 3, Jackson supported Eminem on his and Jay-Z's The Home & Home Tour, performing "Crack A Bottle" with Eminem and Dr. Dre amid rumors of tension between Jackson and Dre.He "recorded 20 songs to a whole different album concept" before putting them aside, wanting his new album to have the "aggression" of Get Rich or Die Tryin'. Jackson tweeted that the album was "80 percent done" and fans could expect it in the summer of 2011. It was ultimately delayed a year due to disagreements with Interscope Records, with Jackson saying that he would release it in November 2011 with a different title than Black Magic. Eminem would appear on the album, and Jackson said he was working with new producers such as Boi-1da and Alex da Kid. Cardiak, who produced Lloyd Banks' "Start It Up", confirmed that he produced a song for the upcoming album.
Jackson released a song, "Outlaw", from his fifth album on the Internet on June 16, 2011. The single, produced by Cardiak, was released on iTunes on July 19 (although Jackson tweeted that it was not the album's first single). The rapper planned to write a semi-autobiographical young-adult novel about bullying, different from his previous books which focused on his life and the rules of power. According to the book's publisher, the first-person novel (about a 13-year-old schoolyard bully "who finds redemption as he faces what he's done") was scheduled for publication in January 2012.
In a series of tweets, Jackson said that the delay of his fifth album was due to disagreements with Interscope Records, later suggesting that it would be released in November 2011 with his headphone line (SMS by 50). He speculated to MTV News about not renewing his five-album contract with Interscope: "I don't know ... It will all be clear in the negotiations following me turning this actual album in. And, of course, the performance and how they actually treat the work will determine whether you still want to stay in that position or not."On June 20, 2011, Jackson announced the release of Before I Self Destruct II after his fifth album. Although he planned to shoot a music video for the fifth album's lead single, "I'm On It", on June 26 the video was never filmed. Jackson told Shade45, "I did four songs in Detroit with Eminem. I did two with Just Blaze, a Boi-1da joint, and I did something with Alex da Kid. We made two that are definite singles and the other two are the kinds of records that we been making, more aimed at my core audience, more aggressive, more of a different kind of energy to it." He released "Street King Energy Track #7" in September 2011 to promote Street King, his charity-based energy drink. An announcement that Jackson was shooting a music video for "Girls Go Wild", the fifth-album lead single featuring Jeremih, was made on September 28, 2011.Jackson's fifth album, Street King Immortal, was initially scheduled for a summer 2012 release and postponed until November 13. Disagreements with Interscope Records about its release and promotion led to its temporary cancellation. Its first promo single, "New Day" with Dr. Dre and Alicia Keys, was released on July 27. The song was produced by Dr. Dre, mixed by Eminem and written by 50 Cent, Alicia Keys, Royce da 5'9" and Dr. Dre. A solo version by Keys was leaked by her husband, Swizz Beatz. "My Life", the album's second promo single (with Eminem and Maroon 5 lead singer Adam Levine), was released on November 26, 2012.
In January 2014, Jackson said he planned to release Animal Ambition in the first quarter of the year, followed by Street King Immortal. On February 20, he left Shady Records, Aftermath Entertainment, and Interscope, signing with Caroline and Capitol Music Group. According to Jackson, although he owed Interscope another album, he was released from his contract because of his friendship with Eminem and Dr. Dre: "I'm a special case and situation. It's also because of the leverage of having the strong relationships with Eminem and Dr. Dre. They don't want me to be uncomfortable. They value our friendship to the point that they would never want [to jeopardize] it over that little bit of money."That day, he announced that Animal Ambition would be released on June 3 and released its first track. The song, "Funeral", was released with a video on Forbes.com. Produced by Jake One, it is a continuation of "50 Bars" from a previous album; two more tracks were scheduled for release on March 18. At South by Southwest in Austin, Texas, Jackson performed "Hold On" from the new album. That song and "Don't Worry 'Bout It" were released with accompanying videos on March 18. According to Jackson, prosperity would be a theme of the album: "This project, I had to search for a concept, a really good concept, in my perspective, and that was prosperity. I outlined all the things that would be a part of prosperity, positive and negative [for Animal Ambition]."


=== 2015–present: Street King Immortal, bankruptcy, and departure from Interscope ===
On May 14, 2015, Jackson revealed in an interview that the first single from Street King Immortal, would be previewed Memorial Day weekend and would likely be released in June. Jackson released "Get Low" on May 20, 2015, as the intended first single from his sixth studio album, Street King Immortal. The song, produced by Remo the Hitmaker, features vocals from fellow American rappers 2 Chainz and T.I., as well as American singer Jeremih. He announced bankruptcy on July 13, 2015.On March 31, 2017, Interscope Records released 50 Cent's final album for the label, a greatest hits album titled Best Of.
In 2020, Jackson led the executive-producer duties for late rapper Pop Smoke's debut album, Shoot for the Stars, Aim for the Moon, having been one of Pop Smoke's biggest inspirations. The album was released on July 3, 2020. Jackson curated the album, desiring to finish it after Pop had died. He contacted many of the artists involved, and also features on one of the album tracks, "The Woo". The Woo also features vocals from fellow American rapper Roddy Ricch.In 2020, it was reported that Jackson was producing two television series for Starz, an anthology about hip hop and a biographical drama about sports agent Nicole Lynn.In 2021, he became one of the headliners of the music festival Golden Sand in Riviera Maya.In May 2021, Curtis Jackson moved to Houston. This was thought to be for lower taxes, no income tax, and for the rapper scene, as well as other ventures such as writing new screenplays. Also, Jackson, Horizon United Group, and Houston Independent School District began a partnership on a project that would help high school students learn the business skills that define successful entrepreneurship.
While living in Houston, Curtis Jackson was in the process of writing screenplays for new crime shows.In a July 2021 interview with The Independent, 50 Cent confirmed that he had officially decided to shelve his Street King Immortal album after it spent a decade in development hell. He even confirmed that he plans to release a completely new project.In August 2021, he was confirmed to be starring in the upcoming Expend4bles film.In the fall of 2021 Starz released "Black Mafia Family," a series based on two brothers in Detroit who ran a drug trafficking and money laundering operation from the mid-1980s until 2005. Jackson is the executive producer of the show, which is based on a true story.
On February 13, 2022, 50 Cent was a surprise performer in the Super Bowl LVI halftime show, receiving a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Variety Special (Live) in September for the performance.


== Artistry ==
Jackson cites Boogie Down Productions, Big Daddy Kane, The Juice Crew, EPMD and KRS-One as his rapping influences, while citing LL Cool J as an inspiration behind his writing of "21 Questions". Jackson also states that he drew influences from Nas, Rakim and The Notorious B.I.G. while working on Animal Ambition.


== Business ventures ==
Jackson has had a highly successful business career. He is financially invested in a highly diversified variety of industries. Jackson is now involved in artist and talent management, record, television, and film production, footwear, apparel, fragrances, liquor, video games, mobile apps, book publishing, headphones, along with health drinks and dietary supplements. His broad business and investment portfolio contains investments in a variety of sectors including real estate, financial market investments, mining, boxing promotion, vodka, fragrances, consumer electronics and fashion.He established his own record label G-Unit Records in 2003 following his mainstream success. In November 2003, he signed a five-year deal with Reebok to distribute a G-Unit Sneakers line for his G-Unit Clothing Company. In an interview, Jackson said his businesses had a habit of doing well as he saw all of his ventures both past and present as revolving around his alter ego.Jackson has also started a book publishing imprint, G-Unit Books on January 4, 2007, at the Time Warner Building in New York. He has written a number of books including a memoir, From Pieces To Weight in 2005 where it sold 73,000 copies in hardcover and 14,000 copies in paperback; a crime novel and a book with Robert Greene titled The 50th Law, an urban take on The 48 Laws of Power. In November 2011, Jackson released 50 Cent's Playground, a young adult fiction novel about a bullied, violent boy and his gay mother.One of Jackson's first business ventures was a partnership with Glacéau to create an enhanced water drink called Formula 50. In October 2004, Jackson became a beverage investor when he was given a minority share in the company in exchange for becoming a spokesperson after learning that he was a fan of the beverage. The health conscious Jackson noted that he first learned of the product while at a gym in Los Angeles, and stated that "they do such a good job making water taste good". After becoming a minority shareholder and celebrity spokesperson, Jackson worked with the company to create a new grape flavored "Formula 50" variant of VitaminWater and mentioned the drinks in various songs and interviews. In 2007, Coca-Cola purchased Glacéau for $4.1 billion and, according to Forbes, Jackson, who was a minority shareholder, earned $100 million from the deal after taxes.Though he no longer has an equity stake in the company, Jackson continues to act as a spokesperson for VitaminWater, supporting the product including singing about it at the BET Awards and expressing his excitement over the company's continuing to allow his input on products.
He joined Right Guard to introduce a body spray (Pure 50 RGX) and endorsed Magic Stick condoms, planning to donate part of their proceeds to increasing HIV awareness. Jackson signed a multi-year deal with Steiner Sports to sell his memorabilia, and announced plans for a dietary-supplement company in conjunction with his film Spectacular Regret in August 2007.
Jackson has founded two film production companies: G-Unit Films in 2003 and Cheetah Vision in 2008. Cheetah Vision produces low budget action thrillers for foreign film markets across the world. When G-Unit Films folded, he focused on Cheetah Vision and the company obtained $200 million in funding in 2010. In 2010, Jackson revived G-Unit Films, renaming the company to G-Unit Films and Television Inc. The company has joint ventures with Will Packer's production company Will Packer Productions and Universal Television. In over 18 months, Jackson has sold projects to six different networks. Among them was Power, a STARZ drama in which he not only co-stars but also serves as co-creator and executive producer. Power debuted in June 2014 and was renewed for a second season after one episode.Jackson serves as a co-star, co-creator and executive television producer of the STARZ network drama where he signed a 2-year contract with representation coming from the Agency for the Performing Arts. Ratings have been a success for Starz. with the second-season premiere being the highest-ever season with 1.43 million people tuning in live. "Power" ended in 2020. Jackson is the executive producer of three of its spin-offs, "PowerBook II: Ghost," "PowerBook III: Raising Kanan," and "Powerbook IV: Force."
In 2002, Jackson filed an application with the United States Patent and Trademark Office to register the term "50 Cent" as a trademark for clothing, sound recordings, and live performances. The application was published in 2003, and registration issued in 2004. He has since filed for additional trademark registrations.
In July 2011, Jackson launched a philanthropic initiative to provide food for one billion starving people in Africa by 2016, joining Pure Growth Partners to introduce Street King. A portion of the proceeds from each Street King purchase would be used to provide a daily meal to an underprivileged child. The partnership coincides with Jackson's goal to feed a billion people in Africa during the next five years. "50 Cent and I share a common vision: to address the world's problems through smart and sustainable business models," said Chris Clarke, founder and CEO of Pure Growth Partners. "With the rampant starvation in Africa and hunger afflicting children worldwide, we need socially responsible businesses that affect real change now more than ever." Jackson said, "I'm inspired by Clarke's vision and innovative approaches to tackling serious issues. It's our mission with Street King to really change children's lives around the world." In 2011, he founded SMS Audio, a consumer-electronics company selling Street by 50 headphones, pledging to donate a portion of their sales to charity. In April 2015, SMS announced new co-branding deals with Reebok and Marvel. It added those to existing partnerships with Walt Disney Parks, Lucasfilm's Star Wars, and Intel.In 2014, Jackson became a minority shareholder in Effen Vodka, a brand of vodka produced in the Netherlands, when he invested undisclosed amount in the company Sire Spirits LLC. He currently endorses the product via his live concert performances and social media. The rapper was asked to take part in two promotional bottle signings, one in Oak Creek and another in Sun Prairie. Jackson made an appearance at Liquor Warehouse in Syracuse, New York on April 25, 2015, where he reportedly sold 1,400 bottles (277 gallons) of Jackson's signature liquor brand. Liquor Warehouse's owner George Angeloro reportedly stocked 300 cases (1,800 bottles or 357 gallons) of Effen Vodka, which sells for $30 a bottle, prior to the event.In December 2014, Jackson signed a $78 million deal with FRIGO Revolution Wear, a luxury underwear brand. The joint venture is partnered between Jackson, basketball player Carmelo Anthony, baseball player Derek Jeter and Mathias Ingvarsson, the former president of mattress company Tempur-Pedic. Jackson became the chief fashion designer for the brands single pair of Frigo boxers. In April 2015, Jackson mulled investing in Jamaica, exploring foreign investment opportunities on the island when he met with some local officials and had ongoing discussions on investment opportunities in the Montego Bay resort area.


=== Investments ===
Over the years, Jackson invested his earnings from music and celebrity endorsements in an array of privately controlled companies, real estate, and stocks and bonds. A portion of his investments lost value during the 2008 recession. In December 2008, he told the Canadian press that he had been affected by the recession, losing several million dollars in the stock market. Unable to sell his Connecticut mansion, Jackson postponed Before I Self-Destruct due to the severity of the economic downturn.His Farmington mansion located on 50 Poplar Hill Drive that he tried to sell for years filed for bankruptcy in Connecticut in 2015 listed an asking price for that property in 2012 at $10 million but was valued at $8.3 million in 2015. He first tried to sell the house in 2007 for $18.5 million, and dropped the price several times in the next five years, when it was on and off the market.In January 2011, Jackson reportedly made $10 million after using Twitter to promote a marketing company which he was part shareholder of. His endorsements company G Unit Brands Inc. revealed through a public SEC filing controls 12.9 per cent of H&H Imports, which is a parent company of TV Goods – the firm responsible for marketing his range of headphones, Sleek by 50 Cent. Jackson bought stock in the company on November 30, 2010, a week after it offered buyers 180 million shares at 17 cents each. Jackson later made a stock recommendation on Twitter, causing its share value to rise from four cents to nearly 50 cents (32p) each, closing on Monday at 39 cents (25p). Jackson was later investigated by the Securities and Exchange Commission for breaching securities laws following his tweet which may have constituted allegations of Insider trading via his Pump and dump stock investment strategy.In 2013, Jackson became a minority investor in Hang w/, a live video broadcasting mobile app used by dozens of celebrities to broadcast their daily activities and chat with fans. The app was downloaded more than 1 million times since its launch in March 2013 and had more than 1 million users as of February 2015. Other minority celebrity investors include former NFL player Terrell Owens and record producer Timbaland.


=== Mining and heavy metals ===
In 2008, Jackson visited a platinum, palladium and iridium mine shaft in South Africa, and met with South African billionaire Patrice Motsepe in talks of purchasing an equity stake in the mine. After his meeting with Motsepe, Jackson considered purchasing equity in the mine and launching his own line of 50 Cent branded platinum.


=== Boxing promotion ===
On July 21, 2012, Jackson became a licensed boxing promoter when he formed his new company, TMT (The Money Team). Licensed to promote in New York, he was in the process of being licensed in Nevada (where most major fights are held in the U.S.). A former amateur boxer, Jackson signed gold medalist and former featherweight champion Yuriorkis Gamboa and middleweight Olympic medalist Andre Dirrell. On July 29, 2012, he and the boxer Floyd Mayweather, Jr., signed IBF featherweight champion Billy Dib. They unveiled plans to challenge the box-office dominance of mixed martial arts and change the landscape of boxing with TMT Promotions. Boxer Zab Judah also expressed interest in making a deal with Jackson. In December 2012, Mayweather and Jackson parted company, with Jackson taking over the promotion company and founding SMS Promotions with Gamboa, Dirrell, Dib, James Kirkland, Luis Olivares and Donte Strayhorn in his stable.


==== Bankruptcy ====
On July 13, 2015, Jackson filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in the U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the District of Connecticut with a debt of $32,509,549.91. On July 17, 2015, the Court issued an order allowing a creditor to proceed with the punitive damages phase of a trial against Jackson in a New York state court, in connection with the alleged release of a private video. His assets were listed as between $10 million and $50 million in his bankruptcy petition, though he testified under oath that he is worth $4.4 million. Citing between $10 million and $50 million in debt, and the same amount in assets. Later in the week, Jackson's bankruptcy lawyers elucidated the court documents that legal fees and judgments exceeding $20 million over the past year were the primary cause of the filing.His filings listed 32 entities that he has a stake in. The bankruptcy came days after a jury ordered him to pay $5 million to rapper Rick Ross's ex-girlfriend Lastonia Leviston for invading her privacy by posting online a sex tape of her and another man. In addition, Jackson lost a dispute over a failed business deal to come to fruition to his Sleek headphones, where Jackson invested more than $2 million. An ex-partner accused Jackson of later stealing the design of the "Sleek by 50" headphones, prompting a judge to award the partner more than $17.2 million. His Connecticut bankruptcy filing states that he owns seven cars valued at more than $500,000, including a 2010 Rolls-Royce and a 1966 Chevrolet Coupe. His expenses of $108,000 a month include $5,000 for gardening along with a monthly income of $185,000, mainly from royalties and income from his external businesses and investments. The court filing says he also owes money to his stylist, his barber, and his fitness coach.Other details in the bankruptcy documents included information about two deals that sold the right to collect royalties of on-air play of his music. Half the rights to his portfolio were sold to the British independent music publishing company Kobalt Music Group for $3 million and the other half for another $3 million with the sales of his albums allowing Jackson to own 100 percent of the rights to the master recordings while paying only for distribution. Zeisler & Zeisler, a Bridgeport law firm, represented 50 Cent in the bankruptcy, which later resulted in Jackson filing a $75 million lawsuit against his own lawyers. He stated that his lawyers did a terrible job of representing him, specifically citing the fallout of his failed venture with Sleek Audio headphones and accused Garvey Schubert Barer, a Wall Street law firm, of failing to "employ the requisite knowledge and skill necessary to confront the circumstances of the case".


=== Corporate positions ===
G-Unity Foundation Inc. – Founder
SMS Audio – CEO, founder
SK Energy – Founder
SMS Promotions – CEO, founder
Sire Spirits – Owner
Effen Vodka – Former minority shareholder


== Personal life ==
On October 13, 1996, Jackson's girlfriend, Shaniqua Tompkins, gave birth to son Marquise. Tompkins later sued Jackson for $50 million in 2009, saying he promised to take care of her for life. The suit, with 15 causes of action, was dismissed by a judge who called it "an unfortunate tale of a love relationship gone sour". The two have bickered for years, and have even taken their feud to social media many times.Marquise's birth changed Jackson's outlook on life: "When my son came into my life, my priorities changed, because I wanted to have the relationship with him that I didn't have with my father." He credited his son for inspiring his career and being the "motivation to go in a different direction". Despite this, the two have endured a fractured relationship that began when Jackson and Tompkins separated in 2008. Their feud has been taken to social media numerous times, including in 2020 when Jackson disclosed that he "used to" love his son. Jackson has a tattoo "Marquise" with an axe on his right biceps ("The axe is 'cause I'm a warrior. I don't want him to be one, though"), and has "50", "Southside" and "Cold World" on his back: "I'm a product of that environment. It's on my back, though, so it's all behind me".In 2003, Jackson briefly dated actress Vivica A. Fox. He broke up with her only 8 months later on the radio.Jackson dated model Daphne Joy and had his second son, Sire Jackson, with her, on September 1, 2012. At the age of two years, Sire modeled for Kidz Safe, a headphone brand for kids, earning $700,000 through his contract.In 2005, Jackson supported President George W. Bush after rapper Kanye West criticized Bush for a slow response to the victims of Hurricane Katrina. If his felony convictions did not prevent him from voting, he said that he would have voted for the president. Jackson later said that Bush "has less compassion than the average human. By all means, I don't aspire to be like George Bush." In September 2007, he told Time that although he would not endorse a candidate in 2008, he "liked Hillary [Clinton]".Six months later, the rapper told MTV News that he had switched his support to Barack Obama after hearing him speak, but had lost interest in politics. Asked his opinion of President Obama's May 9, 2012, endorsement of gay marriage, Jackson said, "I'm for it ... I've encouraged same-sex activities. I've engaged in fetish areas a couple times." He had been criticized for anti-gay comments in the past.Despite having numerous songs that reference drug and alcohol usage, Jackson remains teetotal, citing a bad experience with alcohol as his main reason.Forbes noted Jackson's wealth in 2007, ranking him second behind Jay-Z in the rap industry. He lived in a Farmington, Connecticut, mansion formerly owned by ex-boxer Mike Tyson. Jackson listed the mansion for sale in 2007 at $18.5 million to move closer to his son (who lived on Long Island at the time). The mayor of Bridgeport, Connecticut, declared October 12, 2007 "50 Cent Curtis Jackson Day", honoring the rapper with a proclamation and a key to the city. One of Jackson's New York homes, purchased in January 2007 for $2.4 million and the center of a lawsuit between Jackson and Shaniqua Tompkins, caught fire on May 31, 2008, while he was filming in Louisiana.In December 2008, he told the Canadian press that he had lost several million dollars in the stock market and, unable to sell his Connecticut mansion, had postponed Before I Self-Destruct because of the economic downturn. Jackson won a lawsuit in November 2009 against Taco Bell over the fast-food chain's use of his name without permission.Jackson endorsed Democratic candidate Hillary Clinton in the run-up for the 2016 U.S. presidential election. He rejected an offer of $500,000 from the Trump campaign to make an appearance on the candidate's behalf. However, he endorsed Donald Trump in 2020, due to his dislike of Joe Biden's tax plans. A week later, he retracted his endorsement, saying on Twitter "Fu*k Donald Trump, I never liked him", and endorsed Biden.


=== Legal issues ===
On June 29, 1994, Jackson was arrested for selling four vials of cocaine to an undercover police officer. He was arrested again three weeks later, when police searched his home and found heroin, ten ounces of crack cocaine and a starter's pistol. Although Jackson was sentenced to three to nine years in prison, he served six months in a boot camp (where he earned his high-school equivalency diploma). According to him, he did not use cocaine.Jackson and four members of his entourage were arrested shortly before 2 a.m. on December 31, 2002, when police found a .25-caliber handgun and a .45-caliber pistol in a parked car (which they searched due to its tinted windows) outside a Manhattan nightclub. The rapper was charged with two counts of criminal possession of a weapon.Jackson was sentenced to two years' probation on July 22, 2005, for a May 2004 incident, when he was charged with three counts of assault and battery after jumping into an audience when he was hit by a water bottle.


=== Lawsuits ===


==== Use of image ====
Jackson filed a lawsuit against an advertising company, Traffix of Pearl River, New York, on July 21, 2007, for using his image in a promotion he said threatened his safety. He was alerted by a staff member to an Internet advertisement on a Myspace page. According to court documents, the advertisement had a cartoon image of the rapper with "Shoot the rapper and you will win $5000 or five ring tones guaranteed". Although the ad did not use his name, the image allegedly resembled him and suggested that he endorsed the product. The lawsuit, calling the ad a "vile, tasteless and despicable" use of Jackson's image which "quite literally call[ed] for violence against him", sought unspecified punitive damages and a permanent injunction against the use of his image without permission.


==== Use of name ====
In 2008, Jackson sued Taco Bell over an ad campaign in which it invited him to change his name for one day from 50 Cent to 79 Cent, 89 Cent, or 99 Cent, in line with pricing for some of its items, and they would donate $10,000 to the charity of his choice. The case was settled out of court.


==== Janitor incident ====
While walking through Cincinnati/Northern Kentucky International Airport in May 2016, Jackson harassed and insulted a janitor at the airport, accusing him of being under the influence. The janitor was a hearing-impaired, autistic teenager named Andrew Farrell. The parents of the janitor had seen the viral video as disrespect and wanted to sue Jackson for his action against their child. The lawsuit was originally over one million dollars, but the parents settled for a $100,000 donation to Autism Speaks and his apology.


==== Bamba sample ====
In 2016, a judge declared that Brandon Parrott gave Dr. Dre and 50 Cent the rights to "Bamba" for the song "P.I.M.P."


=== Other civil and criminal matters ===
One of his New York homes, purchased for $2.4 million in January 2007 and the center of a lawsuit between Jackson and Shaniqua Tompkins, caught fire on May 30, 2008, while he was filming in Louisiana. On August 5, 2013, Jackson pleaded not guilty to one count of domestic violence and four counts of vandalism in a Los Angeles County court. If convicted of all charges, he faced up to five years in prison and a $46,000 fine. Model-actress Daphne Joy accused Jackson of kicking her and ransacking her bedroom during an argument at her condominium in the Toluca Lake neighborhood of Los Angeles on June 23. He allegedly caused $7,100 in property damage, leaving the scene before police arrived.Judge Ann Nevins has ordered Jackson back to court because of Instagram messages he made over several months. She said Jackson was not fully clear about his funds and indicated posts of the rapper showing stacks of his money. In March 2016, Jackson claimed that he would no longer use Instagram, electing instead to have his profile page operated by someone else.In 2020, Jackson was a subject of controversy for his involvement in a viral video of him giving money to a Burger King restaurant in New York City on behalf of a local scammer who was later arrested and charged for Bitcoin scamming and for assaulting and kidnapping his victims on April 24, 2021.


== Feuds ==


=== Ja Rule ===
Before he signed with Interscope Records, Jackson engaged in a public dispute with rapper Ja Rule and his label, Murder Inc. Records, saying that a friend robbed jewelry from Ja Rule and the latter accused him of orchestrating the robbery. Ja Rule said that the conflict stemmed from a Queens video shoot, when Jackson did not like seeing him "getting so much love" from the neighborhood. At The Hit Factory in New York in March 2000, Jackson had an altercation with Murder Inc. associates and received three stitches for a stab wound. Rapper Black Child claimed responsibility for the stabbing, saying that he acted in self-defense when he thought someone reached for a gun.An affidavit by an Internal Revenue Service (IRS) agent suggested ties between Murder Inc. and Kenneth "Supreme" McGriff, a New York drug lord suspected of involvement in the murder of Jam Master Jay and Jackson's shooting. An excerpt read:

The investigation has uncovered a conspiracy involving McGriff and others to murder a rap artist who has released songs containing lyrics regarding McGriff's criminal activities. The rap artist was shot in 2000, survived and thereafter refused to cooperate with law enforcement regarding the shooting. Messages transmitted over the Murder Inc. pager indicate that McGriff is involved in an ongoing plot to kill this rap artist, and that he communicates with Murder Inc. employees concerning the target.
The end of the Jackson-Ja Rule feud was confirmed in May 2011. According to Ja Rule, "I'm cool. We ain't beefing no more. We'll never collaborate. That's just what it is. You don't have to be at war with somebody, but it's also kind of like U.S. and another country that they may not get along with. We don't gotta go to war, but we're not friends either. But we can coincide inside of a world. He's doing him, and he's not thinking about me, and I'm doing me and I'm not thinking about him."On August 7, 2015, the feud between the two rappers later reignited when Ja Rule gave a feedback to a social follower via Twitter over a similar feud between Meek Mill and Drake. Enraged, Jackson later responded with photos and comments via Instagram, only siding with Drake. The feud resurfaced three years later on January 19, 2018, when Ja Rule took to Twitter, calling out 50 Cent on social media.


=== The Game ===
Although Jackson was close to The Game before the latter released his debut album, The Documentary, they grew apart. After The Documentary's release, Jackson felt that The Game was disloyal for saying that he did not want to participate in G-Unit's feuds with other rappers (such as Nas, Jadakiss and Fat Joe) and his desire to work with artists with which G-Unit was feuding. He said that he wrote six songs for the album and did not receive proper credit, which The Game denied.
Jackson later dismissed The Game from G-Unit on Hot 97. After the announcement, The Game (a guest earlier in the evening) tried to enter the building with his entourage. After they were denied entry, one of his associates was shot in the leg in a confrontation with a group of men leaving the building. When the situation escalated, the rappers held a joint press conference announcing their reconciliation, and fans were uncertain if the rappers had staged a publicity stunt to boost sales of their recently released albums. After the situation cooled, G-Unit criticized The Game's street credibility and announced that they would not appear on his albums. During a Summer Jam performance The Game announced a boycott of G-Unit, which he called "G-Unot".After the Summer Jam performance The Game recorded "300 Bars and Runnin'", an extended "diss" of G-Unit and Roc-A-Fella Records, for the mixtape You Know What It Is Vol. 3. Jackson responded with his "Piggy Bank" music video, with The Game as Mr. Potato Head and parodies of other rivals. They have continued attacking each other, with The Game releasing two more mixtapes: Ghost Unit and a mixtape-DVD, Stop Snitchin, Stop Lyin. Jackson superimposed The Game's head on the body of a male stripper for the cover of the Hate It or Love It (G-Unit Radio Part 21) mixtape in response to The Game's pictures of G-Unit dressed as the Village People. The Game, under contract to Aftermath Entertainment, signed with Geffen Records to terminate his contractual obligations with G-Unit (although it is claimed that Jackson pressured Dr. Dre to fire him). G-Unit member Spider Loc has insulted The Game in songs, and the latter released "240 Bars (Spider Joke)" and "100 Bars (The Funeral)" attacking G-Unit and Loc. Jackson's response was "Not Rich, Still Lyin'", mocking The Game. Lloyd Banks replied to the Game on a Rap City freestyle-booth segment, followed by a Game "diss" song ("SoundScan") ridiculing the 13-position drop of Banks' album Rotten Apple on the Billboard 200 chart and its disappointing second-week sales. Banks replied on his mixtape Mo' Money In The Bank Pt. 5: Gang Green Season Continues with "Showtime (The Game's Over)", said that Jackson wrote half of The Documentary and ridiculed The Game's suicidal thoughts.In October 2006, The Game made a peace overture (which was not immediately answered) to Jackson, but two days later he said on Power 106 that the peace offer was valid for only one day. In several songs on Doctor's Advocate, he implied that the feud was over. He said in July 2009 that the feud had ended with help from Michael Jackson and Diddy, and apologized for his actions. According to Tony Yayo, neither Jackson nor G-Unit accepted his apology and The Game has resumed his calls for a "G-Unot" boycott at concerts. Jackson released "So Disrespectful" on Before I Self Destruct, targeting Jay-Z, The Game and Young Buck. The Game responded with "Shake", poking fun at the music video for Jackson's "Candy Shop".
On January 2, 2015, The Game claimed that he and 50 were "sworn enemies", promising never to reconcile with him anymore, but on August 1, 2016, they ended their twelve-year feud when the two were in the Ace of Diamonds strip club and The Game said "I love 50, man. What happened, that shit was 12 years ago."In January 2022, the feud reiterated after 50 critiqued Game's Drink Champs interview with N.O.R.E., where he claimed that 50's former competitor Kanye West did "more for me in two weeks than [Dr.] Dre did for me throughout my entire career". The Game responded, commenting that he enclosed the entirety of G-Unit as a group and clothing brand "in a casket", also expressing his likeliness in the Power television trilogy, but warning 50 to "leave [the past] alone or else... I'm outside #Numinati". Then, two months later, in March, 50 Cent published a video via Instagram of Game being shunned by former Interscope Records CEO Jimmy Iovine at a basketball game, poking fun of it while also commenting "50 wrote ya hits". The Game once again flamed 50 after the claims were brought back up and also bragged to "get [50's] girlfriend out of my DM's". This was believed to have been a consequential result of Game claiming on Drink Champs to be "the best and a better rapper" than Eminem, with whom 50 still remains close friends. Additionally, Game's manager, Wack 100, has subliminally called out or questioned 50 Cent's credibility, over the rapper's surprise appearance at the Super Bowl LVI halftime show and ghostwriting allegations.


=== Cam'ron ===
Jackson's issues with former Diplomat Cam'ron began in 2007, when they had a live argument on The Angie Martinez Show on Hot 97 radio. Jackson commented that he felt that the music division of Koch Entertainment (known today as MNRK Music Group) was a "graveyard", meaning major record labels would not work with their artists. Cam'ron then ridiculed the record sales of G-Unit members Lloyd Banks and Mobb Deep by pointing out that Dipset member Jim Jones outsold both of their albums despite not being signed to a major label, and also went on to clarify that his group, The Diplomats, had a distribution deal from several labels. Both rappers released diss songs with videos on YouTube. Jackson released "Funeral Music", and suggested in the song that Cam'ron is no longer able to lead The Diplomats and that Jim Jones should take his place. Cam'ron responded with "Curtis" and "Curtis Pt. II", in which he makes fun of not only Jackson's first name, but also his appearance, calling him "a gorilla, with rabbit teeth". Jackson responded by releasing "Hold On" with Young Buck. Since 2009, the feud slowly died down, and they eventually reconciled in 2016.


=== Rick Ross ===
Although Rick Ross began a feud with Jackson over an alleged incident at the 2008 BET Hip Hop Awards, Jackson told news sources he did not remember seeing Ross there. Later that month Ross' "Mafia Music" was leaked on the Internet, with lyrics apparently disparaging Jackson. Several days later, Jackson released "Officer Ricky (Go Head, Try Me)" in response to "Mafia Music". The following day, Ross appeared on Shade 45 (Eminem's Sirius channel) and told Jackson to come up with something better in 24 hours.
Before leaving for Venezuela, Jackson uploaded a video ("Warning Shot") and the first of a series of "Officer Ricky" cartoons. In early February he uploaded a YouTube video in which he interviewed "Tia", the mother of one of Ross' children; according to her, Ross is in reality a correctional officer. On February 5, 2009, The Game phoned Seattle radio station KUBE. Asked about the dispute between Jackson and Ross, he sided with Jackson and offered to mediate: "Rick Ross, holla at your boy, man" and "50 eating you, boy."On his album Deeper Than Rap, Ross refers to Jackson in "In Cold Blood" and Jackson's mock funeral is part of the song's video. When the song was released, Ross said that he ended Jackson's career. "Rick Ross is Albert From CB4. You ever seen the movie? He's Albert," Jackson replied in an interview. "It never gets worse than this. You get a guy that was a correctional officer come out and base his entire career on writing material from a drug dealer's perspective such as "Freeway" Ricky Ross." Their feud rekindled at the 2012 BET Hip Hop Awards, where Jackson and G-Unit members Kidd Kidd, Mike Knox, Tony Yayo were seen on video attacking Gunplay (a member of Ross' Maybach Music Group). Gunplay's Maybach Music diamond necklace was stolen during the brawl, and several days later Jackson appeared at a Washington, D.C. bowling alley wearing Gunplay's chain. On January 30, 2013, Jackson tweeted that Ross' attempted drive-by shooting on his birthday three days earlier was "staged".


=== Jay-Z and Beyoncé ===
In 1999, with the release of the single "How to Rob" 50 Cent attacked his rap peers, including Jay-Z. The latter responded to the provocation in the single "It's Hot (Some Like It Hot)" in which he says in one verse "Go against Jigga yo ass is dense/I'm about a dollar – what the f*ck is 50 Cents?".In a 2009 interview with Rolling Stone, 50 Cent accused Jay-Z and his record company Roc-A-Fella Records of being unfair to Beanie Sigel because "[Jay-Z] didn't have their interests in mind, he was just doing what he had to do for himself." The rapper also stated that "I don't know him personally, [...] I tried to collaborate with him on the Freeway project ... What I did was Freeway went out and found his publishing deal, and we started the album. [...] when it came time to put the record out, he didn't want to shoot his video. He has a god complex." 50 cent also accused Jay-z of changing in attitude and becoming meidatically more comparable since he married Beyoncé.
In 2017 50 Cent reviewed Jay-Z's thirteenth studio album 4:44 defined it a "golf course music", stated in a Instagram post that "I listened to Jay sh*t, that 4:44. [...] [It] was too smart. I felt like I was supposed to be wearing like glasses and shit and like a tie, a fucking sweater around my waist. It was like Ivy League. They don't wanna hear that shit. [...] They just wanna have a good time. You know what I'm saying? You can't be the best rapper at 47 because the new n****s is here. They coming with new [music] going on." In an interview on the Conan Show , 50 Cent spoke about the album, saying: "Hip-hop culture's connected to youth culture. The kids gonna bring new innovative stuff. He just had the maturity bleed off into the material. [...]  But the kids, I don't see them actually listening to it".In an interview in 2022, 50 Cent reported that in a meeting between him and the couple in Los Angeles, the two rappers were having a heated argument. Beyoncé, seeing them, jumped from a ledge to come to her husband's defense. 50 Cent compared the singer to her sister Solange when she hit Jay-Z in the elevator, describing them as "two gangstas".In an interview for XXL Mag in 2023, 50 Cent claimed that Jay-Z's Grammy wins were due to his marriage to Beyoncé:"Even Jay-Z's career, you can look at that and say the association to Beyoncé is when he started to receive the 16, 17 Grammys, since he's been with Beyoncé. And you go, prior to that [he had] one. That came with the association." 50 Cent also pointed out that the couple's eldest child Blue Ivy Carter won a Grammy even though she does not sing or rap, accusing award ceremonies of giving accolades to the couple just to ensure their attendance during the show. The rapper also reported that his non-win at the Grammys was due to his music being "a little bit abrasive to conservatives; [...] It didn't matter to me in that time period. Don't give me the trophy. They didn't give me Best New Artist and I sold 13 million records", while the Carter-Knowles family is more politically agreeable to the music industry.


== Awards and nominations ==


== Discography ==

Studio albums

Get Rich or Die Tryin' (2003)
The Massacre (2005)
Curtis (2007)
Before I Self Destruct (2009)
Animal Ambition (2014)Collaborative albums

Beg for Mercy (with G-Unit) (2003)
T·O·S (Terminate on Sight) (with G-Unit) (2008)


== Filmography ==


=== Film ===


=== Television ===


=== Video games ===


== In popular culture ==
Jackson's stage name is lent to the female character, Isuzu Sento, in the Japanese light novel/manga/anime series, Amagi Brilliant Park.


== Footnote ==


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website 
50 Cent at AllMusic 
50 Cent at IMDbFrederick Cuffie Jr. (born in April 1961), professionally known by his stage name 60 Second Assassin, is an American rapper from New York, who is a member of Wu-Tang Clan affiliated group Sunz of Man. He has released his debut solo studio album Remarkable Timing on June 22, 2010, via Holy Toledo Productions/Sound Records & Entertainment.


== Discography ==
Studio albums2010 – Remarkable TimingMixtapes2010 – The History of 60
2010 – The Retrospective (A Look Back)


=== with Sunz of Man ===
Studio albums1998 – The Last Shall Be First
2002 – Saviorz Day
2019 - The RebirthMixtapes1998 – The Sunz of Man Mixtape (with Tony Touch)
2003 – Inmates to the Fire... (hosted by DJ Swarm)Compilations2004 – Nothing New Under the Sun
2006 – The Old Testament


=== Guest appearances ===


== References ==


== External links ==
60 Second Assassin discography at DiscogsCharles Misodi Njapa (born March 5, 1976), better known by his stage name 88-Keys, is an American record producer and rapper from New York City.


== Biography ==
Born in New York City to West African parents from Cameroon, he was raised in the Eastchester section of the Bronx and later in West Hempstead on Long Island, where he attended high school.88-Keys first took an interest in hip hop after hearing Prince Paul's production on De La Soul's 1989 critically acclaimed album 3 Feet High and Rising. In the early 1990s, 88-Keys met rapper-producers Q-Tip, Pete Rock and Large Professor working as an intern at West Hempstead's The Music Palace recording studio. It was Large Professor who gave Charles his 88-Keys moniker after witnessing his skills on the Ensoniq ASR-10 keyboard.Upon considering a serious career in music, 88-Keys's parents and older brother began trying to point him into the field of medicine because it was a more "professional field" and the music industry did not seem like a lucrative move. After briefly attending Hofstra University and Queens College, 88-Keys dropped out to pursue his dreams of being a record producer. His decision was fueled by an opportunity to record some tracks with The Pharcyde who were recording in California. 88-Keys currently resides in Harlem, New York with his wife and two daughters.
In addition to his passion for music, 88-Keys has expressed his love for fashion, most notably Ralph Lauren. During an interview with Metro 88-Keys revealed that he has worn Polo Ralph Lauren every day for 16 years.

I try to stay true to Ralph's vision. I don't want to bastardize his vision – no offense to the urban community – because we all know what happened to Tommy Hilfiger once the hip hop community embraced it. I'll walk out of the door dressed in loafers when everyone else is wearing Timberland boots. I definitely stand out. I'll tag along with Kanye on shopping trips and look at clothing by designers whose names I'd need to take French lessons to pronounce. He'll ask me what I think and I'll be like, whatever. I've turned down paying gigs because they've tried to dress me in clothing by other designers. Besides record shopping, the only other place I need is a Polo store. I'll go to Paris and they ll be like, 'here's the Eiffel Tower' and I'm like, 'whatever, where's the record store and the Polo store.
According to the article, 88-Keys began wearing Polo Ralph Lauren as a Long Island high school student in 1992 when he developed a liking for its classic, preppy style. Since then, he's worn a complete look from the brand every day, without fail. His wardrobe includes over 700 Polo pieces.Since his days as an assistant engineer, 88-Keys has produced records for numerous artists including Mos Def, Talib Kweli, Kid Cudi, Macy Gray, Musiq Soulchild, Dejuan Lucian and Consequence. Recently, 88-Keys extended beyond his production credits to highlight his skills on the mic as MC, singer and collaborator, most notably on his solo debut album The Death of Adam released on November 11, 2008. Executively produced by 88-Keys's close friend Kanye West, the concept album tells the story of a man named Adam who has been murdered in a loft apartment in Harlem. In August 2008 a fifteen-track mixtape titled Adam's Case Files was released as a prequel to The Death of Adam. The album's first single titled "Stay Up! (Viagra)" was officially released through iTunes on September 9, 2008. In December 2008, 88-Keys was highlighted as Spin Artist of the Day. In 2009, 88-Keys worked in Atlanta with new female duo Addictive on a track for a forthcoming album.
In June 2019, 88-Keys announced that a song he produced titled "That's Life", featuring Sia and Mac Miller, had been approved for release by Miller's estate, and was released through Warner Records on June 20, 2019.


== Discography ==

Adam's Case Files Mixtape (2008)
Stay Up! (Viagra) Prescription Pack – EP (2008)
The Death of Adam (2008)


== References ==


== External links ==
88-Keys on Facebook
"eightyocho.com". Archived from the original on September 21, 2010. Retrieved April 19, 2009.
"polo67life.com". Archived from the original on January 28, 2015. Retrieved October 7, 2015.Samuel Adams Wisner (born August 14, 1987) is an American rapper, singer and songwriter.


== Early years ==
Sammy Adams was born as Samuel Adams Wisner on August 14, 1987, in Cambridge, Massachusetts, to Kata Hull and Chuck Wisner. He and his family moved to Wayland, Massachusetts, when he was in high school. Adams then attended Beaver Country Day School before transferring to Wayland High School during his junior and senior years. Later, he went on to attend Trinity College, where he played soccer. Although he is referred to as a "Boston's Boy," he actually lived in upper-class suburbs for most of his life.
Adams has been involved in music since his childhood; he played piano from the age of 7. At 11 years old, he began to improvise while playing on his piano, to create his own beats and melodies. Adams has stated in interviews that his musical influences have not only come from other rappers, but also from the classic rock, rock, classical music, and blues genres of music. While seeking to be eclectic, he also stays true to his musical roots so to create a "hip-pop" style in his music.
Adams had aspired to be a producer before he had ever aimed at becoming a rapper. He began writing small raps throughout his time at middle and high school. Adams then started recording songs on his MacBook in 2008 in the dorms of his college.


== Musical career ==


=== 2010: Boston's Boy ===
Over the course of the next two years, he recorded a large amount of material. In September 2009, he released "I Hate College (Remix)," a remix of rapper Asher Roth's song "I Love College," on YouTube. The video has over 10 million views as of September 2015. He also released "Kimber," "Poker Face Remix," "Hard s***," "Opening Day," and "Rollin," which have combined for over 2 million views as of September 2012. Opening day, plus his aboveground debut the Boston's Boy EP. The EP topped iTunes' hip-hop charts, driven by the success of "Driving Me Crazy" Adams first EP, Boston's Boy, was released on March 4, 2010, by 1st Round Records and reached #73 on the Billboard 200 and reached #1 on iTunes.  The album was received relatively well critically. The album was praised for its dance beats, catchy lyrics, and overall fun feel. Adams credited his loyal college fan base for the success of Boston's Boy. On July 13, 2010, four extra tracks were released by Adams to create a "deluxe" version of Boston's Boy. They were "Still I Rise," "See Me Now," "Fly Jets Over Boston," and "Just Sayin.'" Two of the songs, "Still I Rise" and "Fly Jets Over Boston," featured special guests G. Curtis and Curren$y, respectively. G. Curtis was a recent signing to the record label and Curren$y had been working with Adams for a while but had yet to officially collaborate with him on a track.Adams finished his second mixtape, Party Records Mixtape, in London and released it in September 2010. In the same month, Adams was arrested during a show at Kansas State University. After having his noise permit revoked, Adams yelled "Fuck the Police!" and was subsequently handcuffed onstage as he tried to perform his hit "Driving Me Crazy".


=== 2011–2014: Signing with RCA and debut EP ===
He performed at the music festival Lollapalooza in Chicago in August 2011. In late 2011, Adams signed with RCA Records of Sony. His next single, "Blow Up", tells about how he is back on the rise after the signing, following a stagnant period after his explosion onto the scene with Boston's Boy.
Adams released the singles "Blow Up" and "Summertime", as promotional singles in November 2011 and March 2012, respectively. He made his television debut on the late-night talk show Conan with Conan O'Brien in January 2012 and performed his single "Blow Up". A third single, "Only One" was released in April 2012. "Only One" was Adams' first track to receive mainstream attention on the radio. Before then, he had been relegated to the college and online scene with few radio plays to speak of. Teen Vogue quickly named Adams one of five new "Artists To Watch" in 2012 with Artist Direct giving the single 4 of 5 stars. "Only One" was later included in AT&T's 2012 Summer Olympics commercial featuring footballer Alex Morgan.On August 1, 2012, EW reported that Adams was set to appear as himself on CW's hit teen drama 90210. Adams released a new single titled, "All Night Longer" for digital download on August 21, 2012. In October 2012, he played himself in a German reality show called Berlin Day'n'Night (Berlin Tag und Nacht). In Fall 2012, Adams went on his "All Night Longer" tour. In November 2012, he joined the remix version of American singer-songwriter Taylor Swift’s song “I Knew You Were Trouble”.
During a charity concert in New Jersey on March 23, 2013, Adams fell sick during his performance and was taken to a nearby ambulance for treatment by paramedics. During April 2013 he went on tour with California rapper T. Mills. On May 10, 2013, Adams released a standalone single and its music video. The song is titled "L.A. Story" and features American singer Mike Posner, and is produced by OneRepublic frontman Ryan Tedder. The song was released to iTunes on May 28, and to Mainstream Top 40 radio on June 4, 2013. On September 18, 2013, Sammy took to his personal Twitter page to announce that his debut album, Homecoming, was to be released in October. He later on announced that Homecoming would be released on November 19, 2013, and it was changed to a digital-only EP.


=== 2015–2016: 1st Round and debut LP ===
In 2015, Adams parted with RCA records after 3 years on the label.  He soon announced via Twitter that he would be releasing an album in October 2015 which later postponed to December, as an independent artist.  Soon after, it was announced in an interview that he had rejoined his former independent label, 1st Round Records.
On December 3, 2015, Adams released the lead single "Remember" off his debut album called The Long Way, which would be released through 1st Round Records on March 24, 2016.


=== 2017–present: Independent ===
After the promotional cycle for The Long Way ended, Adams left 1st Round Records. In August 2017, Adams released his new tropical house single "Shining".
On July 29, 2017, Adams headlined the inaugural Briggs Fest hosted in Boston.On November 10, 2017, he released new single "Driving" with Telykast and Basko.


== Personal life ==
Wisner played varsity soccer during the years that he attended Hobart College. He scored 6 goals and had 4 assists with the Statesmen. He then transferred to Trinity College in Hartford, Connecticut where he majored in political science. Wisner played soccer for Trinity College and was named captain during his senior year. He featured as number seventeen on the Varsity soccer team. While playing for Trinity, Wisner tallied 11 goals and 11 assists. He led the team in points in 2008, starting all 16 games for the Bantams.  Wisner was also selected to the All-NESCAC team in 2008, earning First team honors at forward. He is also a fan of English club Arsenal FC. Wisner married Andie Arthur in 2022. 


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===


=== EPs ===


=== Singles ===


=== As featured artist ===


== References ==Adam Arnone (born 1978), better known by his stage name Adeem (pronounced "A-D-M" and sometimes styled ADeeM), is an American rapper from Keene, New Hampshire. He is best known for his work in the hip hop group Glue and for winning the Scribble Jam Emcee Battle in 1998 and 2001. He is also the owner of ECHO FINCH, a creative agency and music label.


== Early life ==
Adeem began rapping at age 15, when he started a group called Mellow Minds with a pair of local rappers in Keene, New Hampshire. The group appeared on Keene State College Radio from 1994 to 1996, where Adeem began to freestyle. In 1996, Adeem met DJ MF Shalem, and the two began working on routines and choreographing a live set.


== Career ==
In 1998, during a trip to Portland, Maine, rapper Sole convinced Adeem to attend Scribble Jam to perform with his group, The Live Poets. Adeem did not intend to participate in the emcee battle that year, but his friends registered him to compete anyway. After eliminating Atmosphere's Slug in the final round, Adeem won the Emcee Battle— it was his first victory in an organized competition. The day after the battle, Mr. Dibbs expanded the 1200 Hobos DJ Crew to include emcees; Adeem was invited to the crew along with Buck 65, Sixtoo, Slug, Doseone, Eyedea, Adverse, Sole, and Alias. Although the crew did not release any projects as a collective, Adeem claimed membership in the group for many years.In late 1998, Adeem met Sage Francis at an open mic event in Providence, Rhode Island. The two artists collaborated and played shows together for a few years afterwards. In 1999, Adeem and Sage flew to Halifax, Nova Scotia, and recorded a 30-minute song with Buck 65 and Sixtoo, which became known as "The Untitled Canadian Recordings". During this time, Adeem and Sage collaborated with Sole and Alias to produce "I'm Afraid", which was released on Sage Francis' Sick of Waiting… in 1999.Later in 1999 Adeem and DJ MF Shalem recorded their first album, The First Few Inches, on cassette tape. The album, almost exclusively produced by Shalem, was individually dubbed, and all inserts were cut by hand. The album featured a guest verse by Adverse, who joined Adeem and Shalem in 2000 to create a group called The Dorian Three. In the following years, The Dorian Three produced two albums and toured nationally.During the summer of 2001, Adeem finished his first solo album, Sweet Talking Your Brain. The album was produced by the Vinyl Monkeys (MF Shalem, The Eclectic, Elektro4, Scott Matelic, Moodswing9, DJ Mayonnaise, Maker) and was self-released in the fall of 2001. The album was later licensed by Syntax Records in the US and by Tri Eight Records in Japan in 2002. Tri Eight subsequently pressed a 12-inch single with the tracks "Sweet Talk", "Forgotten Habit", and "Stargazing".Adeem entered the emcee battle at Scribble Jam again in 2001. He won by defeating battle heavyweights like Sage Francis, Blueprint, and Mac Lethal. At the time, nobody had ever won the emcee battle more than once in the history of the hip-hop festival. Because his longtime partner, DJ MF Shalem, was occupied as Sage Francis' tour DJ, Adeem connected with DJ DQ with the intent to create a touring act. At approximately this time, Maker, a producer from Them Badd Apples in Chicago, sent Adeem a collection of beats over which to rap. After successful projects with both DJ DQ and Maker, the trio decided to visit Maker in Aurora, Illinois, to create a touring act. The group, originally called Seconds Away, ultimately became Glue.In 2003, Adeem was chosen to compete in an emcee battle on Last Call with Carson Daly. He finished in second place, behind Breez Evahflowin. The final battle lasted two rounds, only one of which was aired by NBC.In 2004, Glue released its first album, Seconds Away, to critical success from trade publications and the blogosphere. That summer, Glue was asked to play at the Warped Tour with a set at every show that summer.
Catch as Catch Can was ultimately released on September 16, 2006, to critical acclaim; almost 10,000 copies of the album were sold worldwide. Glue supported the album with three coast-to-coast tours between 2006 and 2007, playing with acts like Solillaquists of Sound, X:144 & SPS, and Hangar 18. In January 2008, MTV2 featured Glue on its On the Rise program, highlighting the group as an innovative, new hip-hop group from Chicago. The group toured briefly in 2008 but decided to take a break before working on its next album.The Volume in the Ground, released in May 2011, featured collaboration with DJ MF Shalem, Maker, Chadeo, and Nobs. Adeem recorded vocals in Orlando, Florida, with Solillaquists of Sound members Swamburger and Alexandrah. The album was released, DIY, on Winners Never Sleep Records.In early 2011, Adeem and DJ MF Shalem began working on a follow-up to their 2004 album. Titled Made in New Hampshire, it was intended for release in October 2011.Adam’s follow up album to Volume in the Ground came in the form of a complete redesign of his process. He enlisted the help of musicians Jentri Jollimore, Chris Beam, Mike Chadhina, and Ben Rogers to create a new sound based on the direction he started on Volume in the Ground. These sessions became Move Toward Life. Mostly improvised or written on the spot, Ben Rogers at Loud Sun Studio would capture everything in his underground basement studio. 
The album took the form of a rockabilly/blues/rap three headed monster. Shortly after the album was completed Adam’s mother unexpectedly passed away tragically. While grieving and adjusting to a new reality he set aside the name Adeem and started Adam and the Flood. New beginnings for new days. As a dedication to his mother Adam added the intro Nancy Lives to Move Toward Life. The song was made from recordings found on his mother’s phone. Shortly after the release of the album the Flood expanded to include musicians Josh Blair, Walker Landis, Justin Gregory, and Jon Braught. In 2019 The group would go on to record one ep together named Never Alone at Loud Sun Studios.
In 2020 as the pandemic hit, Adam found himself separated from the group and focusing on production. The result of those months in solitude with his family was the album COPE pt 1 and 2. It’s the first album where Adam handled all production and vocals. It was mixed by the legendary Mark “DJ EXIT” Goodchild.
In 2021 as a result of the pandemic and his new found love for producing, Adam started ECHO FINCH. A creative agency focusing on licensing music and scoring content. It also serves as a record label. Home to Rain, Modern Fools, Adam and the Flood, and Herr.


== Personal life ==
Adeem lives in New Hampshire, with his wife, daughter, and son.


== Discography ==
Adam and the Flood

Move Toward Life (Nancy Lives! Records, 2017)
Never Alone (Nancy Lives! Records, 2019)
COPE pts 1 and 2  (Echo Finch, 2020)Adeem 

Sweet Talking Your Brain (Syntax/Tri-Eight Records, 2002)
The Volume in the Ground (Winners Never Sleep Records, 2011)Adeem & Shalem 

The First Few Inches (Childproof Records, 1999)
Transitions (Shake It Records, 2004)
Made in New Hampshire (Childproof Records, 2011)The Dorian Three (Adeem with Adverse & Shalem)

The Dorian Three (Childproof Records, 2000)
Down World, Up Songs (Childproof Records, 2004)Glue (Adeem with Maker & DJ DQ)

Seconds Away (Ramona Records, 2003)
Sunset Lodge (Shake It Records, 2005)
Catch as Catch Can (Fat Beats Records, 2006)Guest appearances

Passage & The Bomarr Monk - "Resonance" from Moods & Symptoms (2000)
Sixtoo - "The Canada Project" from Songs I Hate (And Other People Moments) (2001)
Sole - "Lyrically Able" from Learning to Walk (2002)
Deeskee - "Joy 2 the World" from Lovingly Fragmented Memories of Deeskee (2002)
Wordz - "Weekend" from You Haven't Heard Me Yet (2003)
Maker - "Jumpin Lily" from Honestly (2003)
Qwel - "Live Outro" from Stone Soup (2005)
Playdough - "Jon Bon Iver" from Writer Dye: Deux or Die (2012)
Qwel & Maker - "En Garde (Remix)" from Beautiful EP (2013)
Figure - "Check My Movements" from Gravity (2015)
Pine Grove - "4:3" from When We Meet Again (2016)
Oldeaf “Ada” from Smile (2016)
Seez Mics “Float Away” from With (2017)
Tomy Wealth “Liberty” from Prey (2018)
Bluesleep “Cavalier” from I’m going for your soul….10 years on (2019)
Inspiration “Mentor and Protege” from The Journey Has Just Begun (2020)
Maker “Summer Streets” from Sights Unseen (2020)
Eyenine “Old & Bitter” from A Little Above Low Key (2021)


== References ==


== External links ==
Adeem discography at DiscogsIan Matthias Bavitz (born June 5, 1976), better known by his stage name Aesop Rock, is an American rapper and producer from Long Island, New York. He was at the forefront of the new wave of underground and alternative hip hop acts that emerged during the late 1990s and early 2000s. He was signed to El-P's Definitive Jux label until it went on hiatus in 2010. In a 2010 retrospective, betterPropaganda ranked him at number 19 at the Top 100 Artists of the Decade.He released his first album, Music for Earthworms, in 1997, with Float following three years later. Labor Days, his third studio album, was released in September 2001. His next release came two years later, titled Bazooka Tooth, released in September 2003. His fourth studio album, None Shall Pass, was released in August 2007. Its titular song became one of Ian's most popular and well-known songs. His sixth record, Skelethon, was released in July 2012. His seventh release, The Impossible Kid, came out in April 2016. His eighth album, Spirit World Field Guide, came out in November 2020, with his ninth and most recent album, Garbology, released in November 2021.
He was a member of the groups The Weathermen, Hail Mary Mallon, and the Uncluded, and is currently the vocalist of duo Malibu Ken.Regarding his name, he said: "I acquired the name Aesop from a movie I had acted in with some friends. It was my character's name and it sort of stuck. The rock part came later just from throwing it in rhymes."


== Early life and education ==


=== Early and personal life ===
Bavitz was born at Syosset Hospital in Syosset, New York, and raised in Northport, Long Island, New York to his father Paul and mother Jameija. Bavitz has two brothers: Christopher T. Bavitz (born 1973), a clinical professor at Harvard Law School and director of Cyberlaw Clinic at the Berkman Klein Center for Internet & Society, and Graham J. Bavitz (born 1978). Along with his siblings, Ian was raised Catholic, but he later became agnostic. Bavitz attended Northport High School in 1990 and graduated in 1994. In 2005, he married Allyson Baker, guitarist and vocalist of rock band Dirty Ghosts; they resided in San Francisco, but have since divorced.


=== 1994–1998: College ===
After graduating from high school, Bavitz attended Boston University in Massachusetts where he studied visual arts. He acquired his bachelor's in 1998. He met his future collaborator, Blockhead, in 1994 during the latter's only year at the school. After hearing Aesop Rock freestyle, Blockhead decided to forgo his own dreams of rapping in favor of focusing on production. Blockhead was involved with a crew in New York called The Overground that included Dub-L. During his early adulthood, Aesop Rock held various odd jobs including positions answering phones for clothing catalogs, packaging artwork in art gallery storerooms and working for one-hour photo developers.


== Career ==


=== 1985–2001: New York City underground music scene ===
As a youth, Bavitz and his family would usually commute to New York City. This had a great impact on him and the way he viewed the hip hop culture. Bavitz began rapping in the early 1990s. He cites Public Enemy, BDP, KMD, and Run DMC as early influences. Bavitz also listened to rock acts such as Dead Kennedys, Fugazi, and Ministry; he was introduced to these groups by his older brother Chris. Bavitz started to play the piano and bass at an early age and eventually acquired a sampler.While attending college, Bavitz initially recorded and released two self-financed efforts, Music for Earthworms (1997), a full-length featuring underground artist Percee P on two tracks. Bavitz also released a music video for "Abandon All Hope", which was one of the tracks on the CD. The album sold over 300 copies, largely from a grassroots internet-based promotion at his website AesopRock.com and then-popular web portal, MP3.com. With the money he made from his previous release, he then released his Appleseed EP in 1999 which received critical acclaim in the underground hip-hop circuit. His early records were mostly produced by his long-time friend Blockhead and underground producer Dub-L.
After his breakthrough success in the underground hip hop and indie rap community, he was eventually noticed by the Mush label and obtained his first record deal in 1999, just a year after he graduated from college. Aesop released his first major album, Float (2000), with guest appearances from Vast Aire, Slug, and Dose One. Production was split between Blockhead and Aesop himself, with one track by Omega One. During this time, Aesop worked at a photography gallery. In August 2001, Bavitz had a nervous breakdown. The song "One of Four" on his Daylight EP documents his struggles.


=== 2001–2004: Labor Days, Daylight EP, and Bazooka Tooth ===
Shortly after releasing Float, Aesop Rock signed to Manhattan-based label Definitive Jux (commonly shortened to Def Jux), where he released Labor Days (2001), an album dedicated to the discussion of labor in American society and the concept of "wage slaves". This album was most well known for its single "Daylight". Because of its popularity, Daylight was re-released in 2002 as a seven-track EP, including an "alternative" new version of the song "Night Light", whose paraphrased lyrics simultaneously refer back to, and stand in stark opposition to, the original's. The song "Labor" (from Labor Days) was featured in Tony Hawk's Pro Skater 4; it also was the first album in his catalog to break through the Billboard charts, peaking at number 15 at the United States Independent Charts.

Labor Days was followed by Bazooka Tooth in 2003. For the first time, production was mostly handled by Bavitz himself, with three tracks from longtime collaborator Blockhead and one from close friend and Definitive Jux label CEO El-P. Guest appearances include Party Fun Action Committee, El-P, and Mr. Lif (all Definitive Jux labelmates) and Camp Lo. With this release Aesop hit a higher level of recognition, releasing "No Jumper Cables" as a single and music video, then another single, "Freeze", shortly after. A remix of "No Jumper Cables" was featured on Tony Hawk's Underground 2, furthering Aesop's recognition. In 2004, he released Build Your Own Bazooka Tooth and created a contest in which contestants had to create a remix of an Aesop Rock song using the a cappellas and instrumentals.


=== 2005–2007: Fast Cars EP, None Shall Pass and Nike+iPod ===
In February 2005, Aesop Rock released a new EP, Fast Cars, Danger, Fire and Knives. The first pressing of the EP included an 88-page booklet with lyrics from every release from Float until this EP (the lyric booklet is titled The Living Human Curiosity Sideshow); later pressings of the album come without the booklet, but with an additional bonus track, "Facemelter". In addition, a limited number of albums were available direct from Def Jux with Aesop Rock's graffiti tag on them. In response to demands from his fans, Bavitz did less production on the EP; three songs are produced by Blockhead, three produced by Aesop, and one by Rob Sonic. During this time, he was asked to join The Weathermen to replace Vast Aire.
Aesop Rock was commissioned to create a 45-minute instrumental track for the Nike+iPod running system, entitled All Day. It was released in February 2007. Distributed via the iTunes Music Store and featuring Allyson Baker on guitar and with scratches from DJ Big Wiz, Aesop has described the release as "something that evolved enough that the sound was constantly fresh and attractive, as though the runner were moving through a set of differing cities or landscapes."All Day was followed in August of the same year by Bavitz's fifth full-length album, None Shall Pass, released in 2007. The album contained original art by Jeremy Fish, whose work Rock set to a slideshow backed by a track titled "Tomorrow Morning". It was exhibited in San Francisco and was available for download online. None Shall Pass had positive reviews from critics and fans, applauding Aesop for his change in sound.


=== 2007–2011: Hiatus ===
In February 2010, El-P announced that the label would be put "on hiatus," aside from selling its catalog and merchandise. During this time, Bavitz was absent in terms of making any new albums or EPs, albeit being featured on other artists' records and producing.


=== 2008–2013: Rhymesayers, HMM, Kimya Dawson and Skelethon ===
In 2009, Bavitz produced Felt's third album, Felt 3: A Tribute to Rosie Perez.
On April 20, 2011, it was announced that Rhymesayers Entertainment would release Hail Mary Mallon's debut album Are You Going To Eat That?. A music video for their first single off the album Smock was announced that same day.In November 2011, Bavitz announced via Reddit that he was working on his next solo album, and had a majority of it complete.In December 2011, Aesop Rock was first reported to be working on an album with anti-folk singer Kimya Dawson, famous for being one half of the group The Moldy Peaches. The working title for the project was Hokey Fright. The group has since been named The Uncluded.On January 17, 2012, it was reported that Aesop Rock finished recording his upcoming solo album Skelethon, which was scheduled to be released on July 10, 2012, through Rhymesayers Entertainment.On April 10, 2012, the first official single from Aesop Rock's Rhymesayers debut album Skelethon, "Zero Dark Thirty", was released on both SoundCloud and YouTube. As of April 20, 2012, the song had already received combined plays/views of 86,434. Skelethon was released on July 10, 2012.
On February 11, 2013, the first music video from The Uncluded was released on YouTube, and the duo's first album Hokey Fright was released on May 7, 2013. The album will consist of 16 tracks. The video for their third single "Delicate Cycle" has a cameo by the celebrity cat Lil Bub.


=== 2013–present: The Impossible Kid, Malibu Ken and Spirit World Field Guide ===
Aesop Rock toured the United States to promote Skelethon. He has also been touring with Kimya Dawson and performing material as The Uncluded. Along with playing a number of individual events, The Uncluded performed as part of a Rhymesayers lineup at Summerfest in Milwaukee, Wisconsin. On the Skelethon tour, a majority of his touring equipment was stolen, prompting Aesop to raise funds by releasing limited edition artwork. It was announced he will be performing on the first day of Coachella 2013.In February 2016, Aesop Rock released a music video for the song "Rings" and announced his seventh studio album The Impossible Kid, which was released on April 29, 2016. "Rings" was featured in the video game Madden NFL 17.In 2017, Aesop Rock scored his first film soundtrack for Bushwick. In January 2019, Aesop Rock collaborated with electronic musician Tobacco under the name Malibu Ken. The duo released a self-titled album in the same month. In late 2020, Aesop announced his eighth solo album, titled Spirit World Field Guide, along with the release of the album's first single, "The Gates". In October 2021, Aesop announced a reunion with his former producer Blockhead with an upcoming album titled Garbology. The album was released on November 12 of the same year.
On 9 December 2022, Aesop Rock released the song “Pumpkin Seeds” featuring the Chicago rapper Lupe Fiasco and produced by Blockhead. The song is a fundraiser for the Collaboratory, an organization promoting two local DIY skateparks in Dayton, Ohio.


== Lyrics ==

Bavitz's lyrics are generally seen as being both complex and abstract while others dismiss them as verbose. His frequent use of homonyms exacerbates this. Critics state that the use of words can be so detailed that it becomes difficult to determine any meaning. The lyrics are sometimes inspired by events which have occurred in Bavitz's personal life and are thus naturally prone to subjective interpretation by outsiders.Questioned about his lyrical style in an interview, Bavitz responded:

It's probably because it's not the most accessible music in the world. It may pose a slight challenge to the listener beyond your average pop song. I'm no genius by a long shot, but these songs are not nonsensical, that's pretty preposterous. I'd have to be a genius to pull this many nonsensical records over people's eyes. It's not exactly fast food but when people pretend I'm just spewing non-sequiturs and gibberish I can't help but think they simply haven't listened and are regurgitating some rumor they've heard about me. Even if it's not laid out in perfect sentences—is any rap?—you'd have to be an idiot to not at least grasp a few things from these songs. Or have had no interest in pulling anything from them in the first place.
In 2002, on the song "One of Four" (a hidden track on the Daylight EP) Aesop Rock explains:

But I can tell you that I only write shit down when I believe it / so take this how you want but know I mean it.
— Aesop Rock, "One of Four" Daylight EP (2002)

In May 2014, a study by Matt Daniels found that Aesop Rock's vocabulary in his music surpassed 85 other major hip-hop and rap artists, as well as Shakespeare's works and Herman Melville's Moby Dick; he was cited as having the largest vocabulary in hip hop. To build up his vocabulary, he reads a lot of news and science articles and writes down all the words he finds interesting. Analysis of his lyrics identified him as the rapper with the most expansive vocabulary; using the most unique words in a rapper's first 35,000 lyrics, he had 7,839 unique words.


== Discography ==

Float (2000)
Labor Days (2001)
Bazooka Tooth (2003)
None Shall Pass (2007)
Skelethon (2012)
The Impossible Kid (2016)
Spirit World Field Guide (2020)
Garbology (2021) (with Blockhead)
Integrated Tech Solutions (2023)


== Filmography ==


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website 
Aesop Rock at AllMusic
Aesop Rock discography at Discogs
Mush Records Biography
Aesop Rock interview and profile in Exclaim! magazineAaron Ocosice Phillip (born January 31, 1974), better known by his stage name Afu-Ra, is an American underground rapper. A member of the Gang Starr Foundation, he has worked closely with its members, including Gang Starr, Jeru the Damaja, Big Shug and Group Home.


== Career ==
Afu-Ra grew up in Brooklyn, with frequent collaborator Jeru the Damaja.Afu-Ra's first studio appearance was on Jeru's 1994 album The Sun Rises in the East, on the song "Mental Stamina". He made another appearance on Jeru's second album Wrath of the Math, on the track "Physical Stamina", in 1996. Afu's debut single, "Whirlwind Thru Cities", was released in 1998, reaching the top 20 on Billboard's Hot Rap Singles chart. In 1999, he released his second single, "Defeat" b/w "Mortal Kombat". His debut album, Body of the Life Force, was released in October 2000. The album featured production from DJ Premier, DJ Muggs, True Master and Da Beatminerz. Guests included Wu-Tang Clan's GZA and Masta Killa, M.O.P., Ky-Mani Marley, and the Cocoa Brovaz. The album peaked at 183 on the Billboard 200, 13 on the independent chart, and 42 on hip hop.Afu released his second effort Life Force Radio in May 2002 on Koch Records, featuring production from DJ Premier, True Master, Easy Mo Bee, Domingo and Ayatollah. Guests included Guru, Big Daddy Kane, RZA, and Teena Marie. The album was slightly less successful, peaking at 184 on the Billboard 200, 17 on the independent album chart, though 29 on hip hop.In 2004, he released a compilation album titled Afu-Ra presents Perverted Monks, followed by a studio album in 2005, titled State of the Arts on Decon Records. The latter featured production by DJ Premier and Bronze Nazareth and guest vocals from Masta Killa, Royce da 5'9", and Gentleman. In 2012, he independently released Body Of The Life Force 2, which was poorly received.


== Discography ==


== References ==Akir is an American  hip hop recording artist, producer, songwriter activist and, teaching artist known for his complex lyrics and social-political content. His name is an acronym for "Always Keep It Real".


== Biography ==
Akir first entered the hip hop scene as an on-air personality at the high school radio station, WNMH, from 1994 to 1996. In 1998, he ranked second out of 50 in Howard University's Verbal Armageddon, MC competition. Akir sought to improve his musical talent and began to focus on production. Collaborating with his brother and business partner SouthPaw, he co-produced one track on Immortal Technique's Revolutionary Vol. 1. Soon after, Akir released his first song, "Best Friend", on DJ N'finite's mix CD, The Blockbuster Vol. 1, through his own production company, One Enterprises.
In November 2005, Akir and ten other up and coming emcees formed the group The Reavers, and released the album Terror Firma. Soon after, One Enterprises and Viper Records joined to release Akir's debut solo album, Legacy. Soon after the release of Legacy, Akir was featured in The Source's Unsigned Hype sidebar in the January/February 2005 issue, and the "Off The Radar" spotlight in the April 2006 issue. Akir was also featured in XXL magazine's Chairman's Choice in the October 2005 issue, and Show and Prove spotlight in the June 2006 issue. In 2006, Akir appeared as a model for Mecca 5star apparel, appearing in ad campaigns in magazines and billboards.Akir has completed over 10 international tours (Rock the Bells 2006-2012, Vans Warped Tour 2004, Fort Minor 2006, Redman Tour Fall 2007), over 15 domestic tours and over 1000 shows. The festivals he has performed at include: Coachella, Bella Terra, Roskilde (Denmark), Culturanova (Netherlands), L'Boulevard (Morocco), Qart (Norway), Hultsfred (Sweden), Hip Hop Al Parque (Columbia).Additionally, Akir has been involved with the Flocabulary project collaborating with 9th Wonder on a track to transform the story of Romeo and Juliet into a hip hop song for school curriculums. He was also referenced in one of their texts called The Rappers Handbook.
In 2007, One Enterprises and Viper Records in partnership with Koch Distribution reissued Akir's second album Legacy.
In 2008 he was made the head of artist relations at the Hip Hop Caucus during the Respect My Vote '08 campaign which featured such celebrities as DJ Green Lantern, TI, Maino, Dawn Richard, and Pharoahe Monch.AKIR also found himself working with at-risk youth teaching writing, production, and recording with the non-profit organization Art Start, working in a studio donated by Bruce Willis, Russell Simmons and Queen Latifah.
Akir is also a member of a hip-hop artist/activist collective called Rebel Army (a.k.a. Rebel Armz) Including: Immortal Technique, Poison Pen, Diabolic, Swave Sevah, Da Circle (Slim & Fatz), Hasan Salaam, CF, DJ Static, SouthPaw, and DJ GI Joe.
In the fall of 2009 he released a mixtape entitled The Secret hosted by DJ Static and Statik Selektah. FOCUS (EP) was released August 20, 2013 and The Plan (LP) was released on September 24, 2013.


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===
Street Edition Volumes 1 & 2 (2003, One Enterprises)
Legacy (2006, Viper Records)
Supporter Sundays (2011, One Enterprises)
The Plan (2013, Viper Records)


=== Mixtapes ===
The Secret (2009) (with DJ Static and Statik Selektah)


=== EPs ===
Focus EP (2013)


== References ==


== External links ==
Official Website
Akir on Discogs
Akir on AllMusicJared K. Bridgeman, (born May 3, 1974) better known by his stage name Akrobatik, is an American rapper from the Dorchester neighborhood of Boston, Massachusetts. He is also a part of the hip hop collective named The Perceptionists with Mr. Lif and DJ Fakts One, which released Black Dialogue in 2005.


== Career ==
In 1998, Akrobatik released his first single, "Ruff Enough", on Boston's Detonator Records label. It was followed by "Internet MCs" and "Say Yes Say Word".His music has appeared on television series such as HBO's The Wire and ESPN's Playmakers, in films such as Date Movie and Wholetrain, and in video games such as NBA Live '06, Amplitude, Frequency, EA Sports UFC, and Need for Speed: Most Wanted.In 2003, Akrobatik released an album, Balance, on Coup D'état. It ranked at number 4 on CMJ's "Hip-Hop 2003" chart.In December 2005, Akrobatik signed to Fat Beats Records. The Brooklyn-based label released his second studio album, Absolute Value, in 2008. It received positive reviews from AllMusic, HipHopDX, Okayplayer, and PopMatters.In 2011, Akrobatik suffered a ruptured heart valve and was rushed to Massachusetts General Hospital, where he underwent an emergency valve replacement surgery. In 2014, he released an album, Built to Last, which was listed by Spin as one of the 40 best hip-hop albums of the year.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===
Balance (2003)
Absolute Value (2008)
Built to Last (2014)


=== Compilation albums ===
Detonator Records Vol.1 Compilation (2002) (with C-Rayz Walz, Breez Evahflowin', and Snacky Chan)
The Lost Adats (2003)
Essential Akrobatik, Vol. 1 (2007)


=== EPs ===
The EP (2002)


=== Singles ===
"Ruff Enuff" b/w "Woman" (1998)
"Say Yes Say Word" (1999)
"Internet MCs" (2000)
"U Got It" (2001)
”Hypocrite" b/w "Strictly for the DJ's" (2002)
"Remind My Soul" (2003)
"A to the K" b/w "Beast Mode" (2006)
"Put Ya Stamp on It" (2008)
"Alive" (2012)
"Adapt and Prosper" (2017)
"Verbal Assault" (2017) (with Edo G and King T)


=== Guests appearances ===
Mr. Lif – "Avengers" from Enter the Colossus (2000)
7L & Esoteric – "State of the Art" from The Soul Purpose (2001)
Mr. Lif – "Intro (Missing Person's File)" from Emergency Rations (2002)
Mr. Lif – "Post Mortem" from I Phantom (2002)
Push Button Objects – "Fly" from Ghetto Blaster (2003)
Raw Produce – "Rick Cerrone" from The Feeling of Now (2004)
Mr. Lif – "Mo' Mega" from Mo' Mega (2006)
The Mighty Underdogs – "Escape" from Droppin' Science Fiction (2008)
Effect – "Crush the Competition" from Fine Tuned Tantrum (2008)
Fabio Musta – "I Still Want More" from Passport (2009)
Virtuoso – "No Fear" from The Final Conflict (2011)
Mister Jason – "Mister Jason Has a Posse" (2011)
Snowgoons – "The Real Talk" from Black Snow 2 (2013)
DJ Nefarious – "Classic Mindset" from Classic Mindset (2014)
Golden Brown Sound – "Fight" from Great Man Theory (2014)
N.B.S. – "We on That" from Budavets (2014)
Thoughtsarizen – "Trippin (Kelly Dean Remix)" from Traveling Dragon Man (2015)
Reks – "Plane Gang" from The Greatest X (2016)
Ripshop & Reel Drama – "Real as They Come" from Regime Change (2016)
L'Orange & Mr. Lif – "The Scribe" and "Strange Technology" from The Life & Death of Scenery (2016)
The Funk Junkie – "Touch the Ground" from Moondirt (2017)
Ben Shorr – "Over The Bullshit" from Pyrokinesis (2017)
Craig G - "Wake up Dead" from The 20/20 Ep (2020)


== References ==


== External links ==

Akrobatik on SoundCloud 
Akrobatik at AllMusic
Akrobatik discography at DiscogsBrendon Patrick Whitney (April 5, 1976 – March 30, 2018),  better known by his stage name Alias, was a producer and rapper from Hollis, Maine. He was a co-founder of the indie hip hop record label Anticon.


== History ==
Alias originally performed as a rapper with Sole in the group Live Poets. He also produced his own songs, but would still rap over another producer's beats. He moved to California in 1999 to start the label Anticon, as well as to focus on his music. Later on, as Alias began working with Anticon, he produced tracks for the emcees on the label.In 2002, Alias released his first solo album The Other Side of the Looking Glass. He produced and rapped on the album. After that, Alias moved away from rapping to focus solely on production. His production work also moved away from sampling and began to involve more synthesizers and instruments such as guitar. He released his first instrumental album Muted in 2003. The compilation of his remix works, Collected Remixes, was released in 2007. He returned home to Portland, Maine in August 2007.
In 2008, Alias released the album Resurgam. The album is titled after the Portland city motto, which is Latin for "I shall rise again." "Well Water Black" featuring Yoni Wolf of Why? was a popular song from the album, but was never officially released as a single.In 2011, Alias released the instrumental album Fever Dream.He died on March 30, 2018, of a heart attack at age 41.


== Discography ==
Studio albums

The Taste of Rain... Why Kneel? (Anticon, 1999) (with Doseone, Slug & Sole, as Deep Puddle Dynamics)
Paint by Number Songs (Mush, 2001) (with Sole & DJ Mayonnaise, as So-Called Artists)
The Other Side of the Looking Glass (Anticon, 2002)
Muted (Anticon, 2003)
Lillian (Anticon, 2005) (with Ehren)
Brookland/Oaklyn (Anticon, 2006) (with Tarsier)
Resurgam (Anticon, 2008)
Fever Dream (Anticon, 2011)
Pitch Black Prism (Anticon, 2014)
Less is Orchestra (Anticon, 2018) (with Doseone)EPs

Three Phase Irony (6months, 2001)
We Ain't Fessin' (Double Quotes) (Anticon, 2002) (Deep Puddle Dynamics)
Eyes Closed EP (Anticon, 2003)
Plane That Draws a White Line (Anticon, 2006) (with Tarsier)
Resurgam Residual EP (Anticon, 2008)
Indiiggo EP (Anticon, 2014)Compilation albums

Bits & Pieces (2000)
All Things Fixable (Good with Money, 2005)
Collected Remixes (Anticon, 2007)
All Things Fixable 2.0 (Good with Money, 2011)Singles

"Rainmen" (Anticon, 1999) (Deep Puddle Dynamics)
"Sideshow" (Mush, 2001) (So-Called Artists)
"Final Act" (Anticon, 2001)
"Unseen Sights" (Anticon, 2004)
"Dr. C / 5 Year Eve" (Anticon, 2006) (with Tarsier)Guest appearances

DJ Krush – "Song for John Walker" from The Message at the Depth (2002)
Styrofoam – "Misguided" from Nothing's Lost (2004)
Saroos – "During This Course" from Saroos (2006)
Prolyphic & Reanimator – "Survive Another Winter" from The Ugly Truth (2008)
B. Dolan – "Survived Another Winter" from House of Bees Vol. 1 (2009)
Themselves – "Cross Section of Wreckage" from The Free Houdini (2009)Compilation appearances

"Divine Disappointment" on Music for the Advancement of Hip Hop (1999)
"Props 2000" on Strictly Indee (2000)
"Watching Water" on Giga Single (2001)
"Watching Water" "Pill Hiding" "Sixes Last" "Dec. 26th, 2002" "Unseen Sights" on Anticon Label Sampler: 1999-2004 (2004)Production credits

Sole – "Bottle of Humans" from Bottle of Humans (2000)
Sage Francis – "Message Sent" from Personal Journals (2002)
Sole – "Shoot the Messenger", "Tokyo", "Plutonium", "Slow, Cold Drops", "Pawn in the Game Pt. 1", "Pawn in the Game Pt. 2", "The Priziest Horse" & "Teepee on a Highway Blues" from Selling Live Water (2003)
Pedestrian – "O Silent Bed" from Volume One: UnIndian Songs (2005)
Sole – "Every Single One of Us" & "Imsotired" from Live from Rome (2005)
Sage Francis – "Sea Lion", "Escape Artist" & "Product Placement" from A Healthy Distrust (2005)
Subtitle – "Gio-Graph-Ick" from Young Dangerous Heart (2005)
Sage Francis –  "Clickety Clack", "Midgets and Giants" & "Keep Moving" from Human the Death Dance (2007)
B. Dolan – "Heart Failure", "Bombzo for Baghdad" & "Kate" from The Failure (2008)
B. Dolan – Fallen House, Sunken City (2010)
Astronautalis – "Dimitri Mendeleev" from This Is Our Science (2011)Remixes

Themselves – "Only Child Explosion" from The No Music of AIFFS (2003)
13 & God – "Into the Trees" from "Men of Station" (2005)
Son Lux – "Weapons VI" from Weapons (2010)
Themselves – "Gangster of Disbelief" from CrownsDown & Company (2010)


== References ==


== External links ==
Alias on SoundCloud
Alias on DiscogsSteven Adam Markowitz (born August 19, 1988), known professionally as Hoodie Allen, is an American rapper, singer and songwriter from Plainview, New York. After graduating from the University of Pennsylvania, he began working at Google before ultimately quitting to pursue a music career full-time. In 2012, he released his first official EP titled All American which debuted at No. 10 on the Billboard 200. In October 2014, Hoodie officially released his debut studio album, People Keep Talking which was successful with first week sales of over 30,000 along with a debut position of No. 8 on the Billboard 200. Hoodie followed up on his success in January 2016 and released his second studio album, Happy Camper.


== Early life ==
Steven Markowitz was born on Long Island and raised in a Jewish household in Plainview along with his brother, Daniel. He started writing lyrics as a child, and would perform raps for his friends at house parties. Markowitz first attended the Long Island School for the Gifted in South Huntington, and later attended Plainview – Old Bethpage John F. Kennedy High School.
While attending the University of Pennsylvania, he pledged the Alpha Epsilon Pi fraternity. He also played as defensive back for Penn's sprint football team. After graduating in 2010 with a degree in marketing and finance, he worked at Google as an AdWords associate in their Standardized AdWords Reseller Training (START) program. He would leave at 7:00 am for a bus ride to the Googleplex in Mountain View, work a full day at Google, return home at 6:00 pm, write songs, answer fan emails, and schedule concerts until 2:00 or 3:00 AM. Reflecting on this, Allen said, "I was moving so fast, and even while I was at Google there was so much going on that I felt like I was doing two full-time jobs." His dream and passion was music, so when he got opportunities to do live shows, he decided to leave Google.


== Career ==


=== 2009–12: Beginnings and Leap Year ===
Hoodie Allen originally was the duo of Steve Markowitz and Obey City (Samuel Obey, a childhood friend) on vocals and production, respectively. The name came about because Steven's nickname growing up was "Hoodie," and he wanted a name that "would stick in peoples' minds and be a little bit funny and representative of who I am" so a play off of famed filmmaker Woody Allen was settled on. Steven and Obey's first two releases were the Bagels & Beats EP and Making Waves mixtape. These earned Hoodie a nomination for MTVU's Best Music on Campus Award in 2009. The single "UPENN Girls" also received notable attention. However, in 2010 Obey City ceased to produce in Hoodie for unknown reasons, and Steven continued making music with RJ Ferguson (aka RJF), giving himself the name Hoodie Allen. In June 2010, he released "You Are Not a Robot," which sampled "I Am Not a Robot" by Marina and the Diamonds and which hit No. 1 on Hype Machine, an aggregator that collects the most-blogged about music in the world. After seeing the response, he spent the summer working, and finished his mixtape Pep Rally by September. The album was largely produced by RJF, and sampled songs from Death Cab for Cutie, Flight Facilities, Marina and the Diamonds, Ellie Goulding, and Two Door Cinema Club. He picked the name "Pep Rally" because he said that it "captured the energy of the record" and something "new and exciting." He self-financed a video for the lead single "You Are Not A Robot," which helped the mixtape get downloaded over 200,000 times.In July 2011, Hoodie released his third mixtape, Leap Year. It reached 250,000 SoundCloud plays in its first week of release. In support of the album, Hoodie headlined a 15-city tour across North America, including stops in San Francisco, New York City, and Montreal, with supporting act Fortune Family opening on several venues. Previously, he had toured with The Cataracs, Das Racist, Chiddy Bang, Mike Posner, and RJD2.


=== 2012: All American ===

On March 4, 2012, Hoodie announced via Twitter that he would be releasing his first EP, titled All American. He decided on this title because he credited his rise to the American Dream, because he felt the songs showcased his best music to date, and because of a hometown restaurant with the same title. Hoodie spent five months developing the album, building tracks from scratch with his producer, RJF, rather than using sampled beats. Regarding the writing process, Hoodie stated that, "I would describe it as liberating... It was like, 'Okay, I hear this idea in my head, I hear these original ideas, [and] I'm putting them and piecing them together.'" On March 29, 2012, Hoodie released the first single from All American entitled "No Interruption," as well as its music video. The music video for his second single on All American, titled "No Faith In Brooklyn (feat. Jhameel)," was released on April 9. All American was released on April 10, 2012, and debuted as the No. 1 album on iTunes and at No. 10 on the Billboard 200. Over the months of April and May, Hoodie made a 22-stop tour across the US in support of All American, featuring rapper Wax, Jared Evan, and others varied from show to show. The I Work Better In The UK Tour was his first time performing overseas. The Excellent Adventure Tour, which featured G-Eazy, began on September 7, 2012.


=== 2013: Crew Cuts and Americoustic ===
On February 11, 2013, XXL premiered the music video for "Cake Boy," the first single off of Hoodie's upcoming mixtape. The single was later released on iTunes for purchase. A week later, the music video for "Fame Is For Assholes" (abbreviated FIFA) premiered on YouTube which features rapper Chiddy Bang. Hoodie commented, "I wanted to write a track that mixed a classic doo-wop vibe with the more upbeat hip-hop style that my fans have come to love."Hoodie embarked on his Cruisin' USA Tour with Aer and Jared Evan which began on March 5, 2013. G-Eazy, instead of Aer, accompanied Hoodie on his Boston, Philly, and NYC shows. During the Cruisin' USA Tour, Hoodie directed the audience to chant that they wanted to see him on Late Night with Jimmy Fallon. Leading up to Roseland Ballroom, Hoodie started the hashtag "#GetHoodieAllenOnFallon" on Twitter to rally his fans. After trending worldwide, Fallon asked to speak with Hoodie.Hoodie performed his new single "Make It Home" on Fuse alongside Kina Grannis which was released on April 30. The studio version of the single was released onto iTunes on May 15, 2013, where it reached the top ten of the iTunes Hip-Hop/Rap charts.On July 30, 2013, Hoodie released the music video for "No Interruption (Acoustic)". His acoustic EP Americoustic was released on August 13, 2013, and reached No. 1 on the iTunes Hip-Hop/Rap album chart and No. 4 on the iTunes overall albums chart. The EP's guitar work was composed, recorded and produced by Our Last Night guitarist Matt Wentworth.


=== 2014: People Keep Talking ===

The lead single off of Hoodie's debut studio album, People Keep Talking, was released on May 7, 2014, titled "Show Me What You're Made Of." It premiered along with its music video, which parodied the film Happy Gilmore, and featured fellow rapper D-WHY and Tommy Lee from Mötley Crüe. The single was made available for purchase on iTunes and debuted as the No. 2 song overall. Hoodie then made his television debut on Good Day Philadelphia playing an acoustic version of "Show Me What You're Made Of" after a short interview on May 15.To promote the album, Hoodie went on a world tour titled People Keeping Talking World Tour, this included shows in the US, Europe, Canada, and Australia, featuring artists Chiddy Bang and MAX. The tour began on October 29, 2014, at the Royal Oak Music Theater in Royal Oak, Michigan, and ran into June 2015.
After tweeting to bassist Pete Wentz about touring together, it was announced that Hoodie would be a special guest on the Boys of Zummer Tour with co-headliners Fall Out Boy and Wiz Khalifa.


=== 2016–2017: Happy Camper and The Hype ===
On January 22, 2016, Hoodie released his second studio album, Happy Camper. Leading up to its release, the eighth track, "Champagne and Pools" (featuring blackbear and KYLE), and the album's lead single, "Are U Having Any Fun?" (featuring Meghan Tonjes), were released. The lead single was also accompanied by its music video which followed the style of a video game similar to Grand Theft Auto V. Happy Camper was also made available for download on iTunes peaking at No. 2 on the overall albums chart.On September 29, 2017, he released his third studio album, The Hype.


=== 2019: Whatever USA ===
On August 16, 2019, Hoodie released his fourth studio album Whatever USA.Leading up to its release, the ninth track "Never Going Back" was released on March 1, 2019. He then released "Come Around“, the second single on the album, with Christian French on June 21, 2019. The third track released before the album released was "Hell of a Time" which was released on August 2, 2019.


=== 2020: Allegations of Sexual Misconduct ===
In 2020, Sarah Flores accused touring drummer Jimmy Kadesch of sexual misconduct. Hoodie replied later on Twitter saying he had fired a band member accused of sexual misconduct 


=== 2023: Return to music and bub ===
After a three year hiatus, Hoodie returned to music by releasing "Wouldn't That Be Nice", on May 13, 2022. This would later be used as the lead single for his upcoming album named bub.
On March 17, 2023, Hoodie released his fifth album named bub.


== Acting career ==
Hoodie has appeared in four episodes of the CollegeHumor series Jake and Amir since March 3, 2011. He made his CollegeHumor debut as Amir's rap teacher in "Jake and Amir / Rap Teacher (With Hoodie Allen)" and returned to that role three more times in videos titled "Jake and Amir / Rap Teacher 2 (with Hoodie Allen)", "Jake and Amir / Rap Teacher 3 (with Hoodie Allen)", and "Jake and Amir / Jake and Amir Finale Part 5: The Auditions".


== Reception ==
In July 2011, Hoodie cracked the Top 10 of Billboard's Uncharted Territory. For the week of August 5, 2011, he was No. 2 on Billboards Uncharted Territory, with Billboard noting that his "growing popularity is undeniable."On April 10, 2012, Hoodie's All American EP went to No. 1 on the iTunes charts within hours of its release. All American also debuted at No. 10 on Billboard's Top Albums and was featured on its hip-hop and R&B column, The Juice.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===


=== Extended plays ===


=== Mixtapes ===


== Singles ==


=== As lead artist ===


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Hoodie Allen's channel on YouTubeAmil Kahala Whitehead (born September 19, 1973) is an American former rapper and singer. Based in New York City, she signed to prominent hometown native Jay-Z through his Roc-A-Fella Records label imprint in 1997. The following year, she co-performed on his single "Can I Get A..." alongside Ja Rule for the Rush Hour film soundtrack.
Whitehead's debut studio album, All Money Is Legal (2000), peaked at number 45 on the US Billboard 200 chart and spawned two hit singles, "I Got That" (featuring Beyoncé) and "4 da Fam" (featuring Jay-Z, Memphis Bleek and Beanie Sigel). The album, released in a joint venture with Columbia Records, saw generally mixed reviews and Whitehead would subsequently exit with both labels shortly after. As of 2023, she has not released any music since 2014.


== Early life ==
Amil was born on September 19, 1973, in New York City.


== Career ==
In 1997, Amil was a member of Major Coins, an all-female group. The group met Jay-Z, who was looking for a woman to provide vocals on his third album, Vol. 2... Hard Knock Life. Jay-Z asked Amil to freestyle and liked it, and selected her for the role.When Major Coins broke up, Amil decided to follow a solo career with Jay-Z's label, Roc-A-Fella Records, and joined the 1999 Hard Knock Life Tour. After the tour, she appeared on songs with Mariah Carey, Beyoncé, Jermaine Dupri, AZ, DJ Kay Slay, LL Cool J, and Funkmaster Flex.She has appeared on Jay-Z songs such as "Nigga What, Nigga Who", "Can I Get A...", "Do It Again (Put Ya Hands Up)", "S Carter", "You, Me, Him and Her", and "Pop 4 Roc". In August 2000, Amil released her debut solo album, All Money Is Legal. The album featured the single "I Got That", a duet with Beyoncé, and All-Star Roc-A-Fella single  "4 Da Fam". The album also featured Jay-Z, Memphis Bleek, Carl Thomas, Eve, and Beanie Sigel.
Album sales were disappointing, and the singles did not sell well either. Following that album, her last Roc-A-Fella/Def Jam single, "Hey Papi", a song from the soundtrack to the feature film Nutty Professor II: The Klumps, was released. In 2002, Amil had a small role in State Property.In 2005, Amil temporarily re-formed "Major Coinz" and released songs on the mixtape circuit including the single "Glamorous Life" which was featured on MTV's Mixtape Monday.In 2008, Amil released mixtapes titled Az Iz and Amil Returns: The Lost Classics Edition, delivering lyrically with songs such as the emotional "Tears of a Teenage Mother" and the Caribbean vibed "Don't Worry".Amil released the song "Stop" in July 2012. The song was intended to promote the rapper's unreleased mixtape, A Time to Kill. Amil released the song "Remember" in 2014. It was also intended to promote a mixtape titled Another Moment in Life, which remains unreleased.


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===


=== Singles ===


=== Album appearances ===


== References ==


== External links ==
Biography at VH1Antoinette Lovell Patterson (born May 4, 1969), known simply by the mononym Antoinette, is an American rapper from Bronx, New York, who released two albums, during the late 1980s and early 1990s.
She is mainly remembered for her beef with MC Lyte. She was mentioned in the Vibe Hip-Hop Divas publication and her song "I Got An Attitude" (1987) was included in Complex list of "The 50 Best Rap Songs by Women".


== Biography ==
She made her first appearance on the producer Hurby Azor's 1987 compilation album, Hurby's Machine, with her song "I Got An Attitude".


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===


=== Singles ===


==== As lead artist ====


==== Featured singles ====


==== Promotional singles ====


=== Guest appearances ===


== References ==


=== Notes ===


=== Citations ===


== External links ==
Antoinette discography at DiscogsWilliam Alfred, better known as Aone, is a Nigerian-born American record producer and songwriter, signed to Rick Ross' label Maybach Music Group. He became active in the music industry in 2008 and is known for his work with urban music artists such as Juicy J, Birdman, Meek Mill, Young Buck, Rick Ross, Wale, Young Jeezy, D Block,  The Outlawz, and others. His major influences in producing come from Just Blaze, Drumma Boy and Dr. Dre. His work is marked with a "You are now rocking with Aonebeats" tag in most of his recent music.
AOne has also done production for high-profile artists such as French Montana, Rick Ross, Young Buck, Juicy J, Birdman, Wizkid, Prodigy and Yo Gotti, among many others. In the summer of 2013, AOne produced the bass thumping record "Gallardo" for Maybach Music Group and Atlantic Records's "Self Made Vol.3" Compilation Album, which debuted at No. 1 on the US Billboard 200 chart with first-week sales of 50,000 copies. On March 23, 2012 AOne released his first solo full-length project, a mixtape titled Aone Perico, which featured guest appearances from several rappers including Uncle Murda, French Montana, Trae tha Truth, Mistah F.A.B. and more. in May 2015, AOne teamed up with Livemixtapes to release his second solo project, an extended play (EP) titled Cocaine, Steak & Wine.


== Music career ==
Aone gained mainstream attention through his collaboration with Rick Ross, on the song "10 Bricks", which featured Birdman, off of Ross's mixtape Ashes To Ashes released on December 24, 2010. Aone has also worked extensively with American rapper Young Buck, producing records like "Brand New," which featured Juicy J, as well as records like "In The Air," "Home Run," and "Drug Related," from Young Buck's Live Loyal Die Rich mixtape. In May 2010, Aone produced ‘Pay Off,’ for American hip-hop group Outlawz, the record featured Rapper Young Buck, and was included on The Outlawz’s sixth and final studio album, “Perfect Timing.”


=== 2012–present: Aone Perico, Cocaine, Steak & Wine ===
On Mar 23, 2012 AOne released his debut mixtape titled  Aone Perico, The mixtape was released in conjunction with popular mixtape website DatPiff. The mixtape features guest appearances from  Juicy J, Rick Ross, Uncle Murda, French Montana, Trae tha Truth, Mistah F.A.B. and more. The mixtape is entirely self-produced and does not include any vocals of his.On May 26, 2015, Aone partnered with popular music site Livemixtapes to announce the instalment of his second mixtape, Cocaine, Steak & Wine, and a release of the mixtape's first single, "Listen", which features Bay Area MC Mistah F.A.B. and UK singer Katie London. The project Cocaine, Steak & Wine features songs with Mistah Fab, Warren G, Creative Gold, A.Z, Young Breed, JaeO Daftpick, and others.


== Style and equipment ==
Aone has called himself a fan of producers such as Havoc (musician) and DJ Toomp, but writes and produces a variety of genres. About his style, he has stated "It's a mix of the South, and it's a mix of New York. It's a mix of everything. It's something different." Aone uses FL Studio and custom plug-ins to create his beats. He is known for sampling jazz, funk, and soul artists, Like many other producers Aone uses a musical signature tag on many of the songs he has produced. His main tag is a Female pitched-up voice saying "You are now rocking with Aonebeats"


== AOne Music Group ==
In March 2013, AOne Beats started his own record label called AOne Music Group. The label's first artist signed up was Grammy Nominated Singer and Songwriter Torica. The record label's first release was Torica's studio album titled A Beautiful Mess: and featured Miami Rapper Young Breed.


== Production discography ==
AZ
"Different" (2020)
Gunplay
"Gallardo" featuring Rick Ross & Yo Gotti
French Montana
"Ghostbuster" off: Coke Boys 3 (2012)
"Ghetto Boy" feat. Uncle Murda & Torch (of Triple C's) (2012)
"Ghetto Boy" (Remix) feat. Chinx Drugz, Uncle Murda & Torch (2012)
Juicy J
24. "Flood Out The Club" feat. Cassey Veggies (2011)
Berner
Vibes" feat. B-Real & Dizzy Wright (2016)
Thru" (2014)
Meek Mill
Dreamcheaser (Intro)" (2011)
Young Buck
"Drug Related" (2012)
"Nothing For You" (2011)
"Millionaire" feat. Masspike Miles (2012)
"Home Run" feat. Torch & Young Breed (2011)
"Brand New" feat. Juicy J (2012)
"To All My Haters" (2012)
"War Outside" feat. Mistah F.A.B. (2012)
"In The Air" (2013)
"Shots Outside" (2013)
Mistah F.A.B.
"Back to Front" feat.Styles P (2013)
"Money" feat. Torica & Prodigy (2011)
"Letter to My Daughter" (2012)
"What Real Ni**as Do" (2014)
Nyce Da Future
"Shoot a Ni99a" feat. Sam Scarfo, 40 Glocc & Vic Demond (2009)
Outlawz
"Dream Big" (2010)
"Pay Off" feat. Young Buck & Kastro off: Perfect Timing (2011)
"Great Ones" (2010)
AOne Beats
"Listen" feat. Mistah F.A.B. & Katie London (2015)
"Straight To The Money" feat. Mistah F.A.B., Young Breed & JaeO Daftpick (2015)
The Pre$ident
04. "Money Overhere" feat. Young Breed (2011)
Rick Ross
13. "10 Bricks" feat. Birdman (2010)
BK Brasco
"Hard For The Money" feat. N.O.R.E. & Young Buck (2011)
"Stadium Lights" featuring Mario
Jay B
"Dammn" feat. Young Breed (2011)
Roccett
"Came From Nothing" feat. Chevy Jones (2011)
Son Rude
"Only One" feat. Masspike Miles (2012)
Tone Trump
"Afghan" feat. Young Jeezy (2011)
"Afghan (Remix)" feat. N.O.R.E, Young Chris & Cassidy (rapper)
Torch (of: Triple C's)
Truth or Dare (2012)
Straight Work feat Haitian Jak (2014)
Young Breed (of: Triple C's)
"Trap House Rich" feat. Torch & Dubb  (2014)
"Dope Game" feat. Gunplay (2011)
"Workin My Set" feat. Dudus & Peddi Crakk (2012)
"In The Kitchen" feat. Mistah F.A.B. (2015)
Young Noble (of: The Outlawz)
"Franklins" feat. Gudda Gudda, Trae Tha Truth & Hussein Fatal (2012)
"Holding On" Feat Nino Aka Jack London 
D'Prince
"Nomore Sleeping On Em" feat. Wizkid
Mancini
"Nothing To Lose" feat.Lil' Mo undisputed (2011)


== Awards and nominations ==


== EP ==
Cocaine, Steak & Wine (2015)


== Mixtapes ==
Aone Perico (2012)
AOne - (Percio 2.0 Mixtape) (2012)
Cocaine, Steak & Wine (2015)


== References ==


== External links ==
Official websiteAnthony Peaks (December 26, 1964 – January 22, 2010),  better known as Apache, was an American rapper.
Peaks emerged from New Jersey in the late 1980s as a front man for the Flavor Unit, a hip-hop group. He first appeared on the Flavor Unit album, The 45 King Presents The Flavor Unit, in 1990. Apart from his individual records, he also featured on the albums of Naughty By Nature, Queen Latifah, 2Pac and Fat Joe.He signed with Tommy Boy/Warner Bros. Records and released his debut album, Apache Ain't Shit (1993), which peaked at number 69 on the Billboard 200 and No. 15 on the Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums. Also featured on the album was the single "Gangsta Bitch", which peaked at number 67 on the Billboard Hot 100 and  11 on the Hot Rap Singles. Apache released the single "Do Fa Self" in 1993. In 2008, his song, "Gangsta Bitch", would be featured in the video game, Saints Row 2.
Peaks died on January 22, 2010, of undisclosed causes. According to fellow Flavor Unit members Ali Ba-Ski and Lakim Shabazz, the cause of death was heart failure after years of excessive eating, smoking and drinking.


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===


== References ==Chad Aaron Bromley (born March 8, 1979), better known by his stage name Apathy (formerly The Alien Tongue), is a rapper and producer from Willimantic, Connecticut.His first major release was his debut album; Eastern Philosophy in March 2006 with guest appearances from Celph Titled, Ryu, and Blue Raspberry. His second album Wanna Snuggle? was released in 2009 and his third studio album Honkey Kong was released in 2011, both to critical acclaim. His fourth studio album, Connecticut Casual was released on June 3, 2014 and reached #41 in the R&B/Hip Hop Albums charts.Apathy is known for his frequent collaborations with other MCs and groups such as Demigodz, Celph Titled, Doe Rakers, Jedi Mind Tricks, Army of the Pharaohs, Styles of Beyond, and the Get Busy Committee.


== Biography ==


=== Early career ===
In 2001 Bromley joined Demigodz, a local rap collective that included Celph Titled, 7L & Esoteric, EL Fudge, Louis Logic and others. In the period 2000 to 2002 he released a number of solo singles that included “Compatible”, “Just Begun”, “School”, and “Ain’t Nuttin’ Nice" released through Bronx Science Records. Bromley made his album debut when he appeared on the Jedi Mind Tricks album The Psycho Social in 1997. He featured on the tracks "The Three Immortals", "Omnicron" and "The Apostle's Creed". By mid-1997, the Demigodz collective fractured and Apathy together with producer Open Mic self-released the Sureshot Affair EP in 1998. He continued to collaborate under the Demigodz moniker and released The Godz Must Be Crazy EP in 2002 on Ill Boogie Records. The two-disc It's the Bootleg, Muthafuckas! Vol. 1 was released in 2003 and collected the earlier Demigodz material, while in 2004 Where's Your Album?!! brought together some of the previously released solo releases. Both appeared on the Demigodz label. After this second EP, Bromley signed on to Atlantic Records, but left the label in 2009 due to creative disagreements.


=== 2006–2011 ===
As a solo artist now, Bromley released the album, Eastern Philosophy, in March 2006 through Babygrande Records.
Apathy also became a member of Army of the Pharaohs, which was originally formed by Vinnie Paz alongside other underground rap artists. He was featured on their debut album; The Torture Papers released in 2006. In January 2007, Apathy released another collection of his most recent works, Baptism by Fire.
In 2009, Get Busy Committee was formed in Los Angeles, California, by longtime friends Ryu (of Styles of Beyond), Apathy and Scoop DeVille. All production was done by Scoop DeVille and Apathy, while vocals are given by everyone in the group. Their debut album, Uzi Does It, was released for pre-sale download on October 27, 2009 at www.getbusycommittee.com, and available on iTunes and other outlets on November 10. As of 2012, Get Busy Committee is on hiatus, or "dead" as they refer to it; the group members are focused on their solo careers.
He released his second studio album, Wanna Snuggle? in 2009. It was released on Demigodz Records. The album features guest appearances from Phonte of Little Brother, B-Real of Cypress Hill, Celph Titled, and other members of the Demigodz.
His third solo album, Honkey Kong was released on August 23, 2011 on Dirty Version Records, along with the Primate Mindstate EP as a bonus disk.  The album features guest contributions by Celph Titled, Vinnie Paz, Slaine, Ill Bill, Xzibit, Blacastan, Mad Lion, General Steele, Esoteric, Crypt the Warchild, Motive, Planetary, and Reef the Lost Cauze. Producers for Honkey Kong such as DJ Premier and Vanderslice contribute to a limited number of beats on this album, though the majority of the production is handled by Apathy himself.


=== 2011–2015 ===
During 2011, Apathy and Celph Titled started producing a second duo album, called Will Sing for Vengeance. They also worked on their solo careers. In November 2011, Apathy uploaded on to YouTube a new song called "Demigodz Is Back", this song featured Apathy, Ryu and Celph Titled and was produced by Apathy. This song marked the return of Demigodz.
On May 10, 2012, the pair also announced in an interview with Hiphopauthority.com that they were working on a new Demigodz album, titled Killmatic. Apathy stated, "We got a gang of shit in the works, so we always work on multiple, multiple things but we don’t announce things until we’re absolutely positive and definite that they’re coming out.  So, the Demigodz album should be coming in the early-2013." Celph said that the album would contain all six members, "Which is: Apathy, Celph Titled, Ryu, Esoteric, Motive, and Blacastan."
In 2012, Apathy released the double CD It's the Bootleg, Muthafuckas! Volume 3: Fire Walk With Me as the third installment to the It's the Bootleg, Muthafuckas! series, as well as "The Alien Tongue," a collection of his earliest demos and recordings.  The bootleg double CD included collaborations with Nas, Xzibit, DJ Premier, Royce da 5'9", Vinnie Paz, Ill Bill, and B-Real, among others.
On January 14, 2013, Apathy confirmed that Killmatic would be released on March 5. Along with that, he confirmed the official album art. Four days later, Apathy, through his YouTube account, released the first single for Killmatic titled "Demigodz Is Back". In July 2013, through his Twitter account, Apathy announced he was working on a new EP with Harry Fraud, titled Connecticut Casual. Apathy later stated on Facebook that the EP would be available for free download. It is due to be released April, 2014. On November 30, 2013, Vinnie Paz revealed that two new Army Of The Pharaohs albums would be released in 2014. The first album; In Death Reborn is slated for a release on 22 April and the second LP is expected to drop in November. Apathy is confirmed to be on both the upcoming albums, new members including Demigodz member Blacastan and Zilla from Houston, Texas are said to be joining the group.On May 28, 2014, Apathy released "Martha Moxley (Rest in Peace)" featuring Chris Webby, Kappa Gamma, Annoyd and Hayze. The song subtly repeats references to the Murder of Martha Moxley, naming Moxley and Michael Skakel, both then 15.On June 30, 2015 Apathy released two projects: an EP called Weekend At The Cape and the fourth installment of his popular "It's the Bootleg, Muthafuckas!" compilation series called The Black Lodge.


=== 2016–2021 ===
Albums for 2016 include Handshakes With Snakes (which was originally a mixtape), The Widow's Son and an album with O.C. as Perestroika. However, on February 17, 2016 he told on his Facebook page that it wasn't possible to release all three projects in 2016 and that The Widow's Son was delayed until early 2017. March 2017 Apathy said it would be released by the end of the year On July 11, 2017 he announced the release date for Perestroika for September 22, 2017.
The Widow's Son was released on March 2, 2018, through Dirty Version records. It features guests appearances from Pharoahe Monch, M.O.P., Celph Titled, A.G., Locksmith, Ryu and Diabolic. The album contains production work from Apathy himself as well as from DJ Premier, Pete Rock, Buckwild, Nottz, Stu Bangas, and Chumzilla.On September 26, 2020, Apathy posted his planned releases for 2021 to his Instagram page. The projects stated were "Where The River Meets The Sea", An untitled joint project with producer Stu Bangas, "Dive Medicine 2" (a sequel to Apathy's beat tape "Dive Medicine"), an untitled joint project with producer Vanderslice, and an untitled joint project with producer Evidence. Apathy is currently Chief Growth Officer of Greater Property Group.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===
Eastern Philosophy (2006)
Wanna Snuggle? (2009)
Honkey Kong (2011)
Connecticut Casual (2014)
Handshakes With Snakes (2016)
The Widow's Son (2018)
Where the River Meets the Sea (2021)
King of Gods. No Second (2022)


=== Extended plays ===
Make Alotta Money (2010)
Primate Mindstate (2011)
Weekend at the Cape (2015)


=== Compilations ===
It's the Bootleg Muthafuckas!, Volume 1 (2003)
Hell's Lost and Found: It's the Bootleg Muthafuckas!, Volume 2 (2007)
It's the Bootleg Muthafuckas!, Volume 3: Fire Walk With Me (2012)
The Alien Tongue (2012)
It's the Bootleg Muthafuckas!, Volume 4: The Black Lodge (2015)


=== Mixtapes ===
Where's Your Album?!! (2004)
Baptism by Fire (2007)


=== With Celph Titled ===
No Place Like Chrome (2007, album)
Unseen Obscene (2016, compilation album distributed on tour)
Demonology (2017, tour EP)
The Sordid History of Ritual (2018, tour EP)
Blue Sky on Mars (2018, tour EP)
Paragraphs of Murder (2019, tour EP)


=== With Army of the Pharoahs ===
The Torture Papers (2006)
The Unholy Terror (2010)
Pharaoh Philes (2011, Compilation)
In Death Reborn (2014)
Heavy Lies The Crown (2014)


=== Other collaborations ===
Uzi Does It (2009, with Ryu and Scoop Deville)
Perestroika (2017 with O.C.)
King of Gods. No Second. (2022 with Stu Bangas)


== References ==


== External links ==Abdul Ibrahim West (born September 26, 1982), better known by his stage name AR-AB (also referred to as King AB), is an American rapper from Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. He is a member of OBH (Original Block Hustlaz), the label and rap group he co-founded with fellow rapper Dark Lo. Complex named him one of "15 Unsigned Rappers Who Should Get a Deal After SXSW" in March 2013, the same year he turned himself in to authorities following legal trouble. He signed with Cash Money Records in May 2016. OBH members have included: Dark Lo, Lik Moss, Shamoney "Da Wolf", p90 smooth, Breeze Begets, Pretty Flock, Skinny me, Newz, Lord Grimey, Kylledge, Kallie Ziltz, NoBrakes Bras, Young Mir, Wiz Lo & others.


== Music career ==
Abdul West was born on September 26, 1982, in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. West began his career as a battle rapper and went on to become a member of Cassidy's Larsiny Family, appearing as a featured artist on his mixtapes throughout 2007, namely 07-07-07 (Happy Birthday) and Put Ya L In The Sky. He continued working features for artists during this time until the release of his debut mixtape Welcome to Trap Street on May 1, 2008.In 2008, West and Cassidy appeared on the Cocaine City street DVD, where the two collaborated on "City of Dreams" alongside a young French Montana. This would be Ab's first music video before concentrating on his solo career. He released his second mixtape I See Dead People on January 8, 2009, and his third mixtape Allegheny AB on May 26, 2010.West began making waves following the release of his fourth mixtape Who Harder Than Me, released on February 13, 2011. In 2012, West began working on his fifth mixtape Who Harder Than Me II, which was released on October 5, 2012. The record included features from fellow Philadelphia rapper Freeway, and New York rapper and producer Swizz Beatz who had previously worked with Cassidy during the latter's stint with Ruff Ryders Entertainment. The collaboration, during which Swizz Beatz referred to Ab as "most important new artist in rap", prompted speculation whether he would be signed to his label.The following year saw the release of his sixth mixtape MUD Musik on February 28, 2013. This would be his last release before his latest round of legal trouble which saw West turning himself into authorities and incarcerated in March of that same year.


== Personal life ==
West grew up in North Philadelphia. In late 2010, West and Dark Lo formed their label and rap collective OBH (Original Block Hustlaz), which also includes his brother Lik Moss among other rappers. In 2012, West's grandmother died and his mother died the following month. He describes this as a traumatic moment in his life, having already lost an elder brother prior. West is a practicing Muslim, who prays 5 times a day.


=== Legal issues ===
West has been embroiled in a spate of legal issues throughout his career, and prior to his involvement in the music industry, including charges related to drug trafficking, possession, and violent crimes. According to interviews, he has served time in jail on four separate occasions prior to his most-recent 2013 sentencing related to crack cocaine. West, along with eight others, has been indicted in connection with a drug trafficking group in North Philadelphia.


==== 2005 homicide case ====

In 2005, West was one of three men wanted by police in connection to an April 15 shooting that left one man dead and two others injured. Prominent rapper Cassidy was the main suspect, with Ab and a third unidentified man being wanted as accomplices. In a December 3, 2008, interview with PhillyHeatTV, AR-Ab revealed he was found "not guilty", having spent two years fighting the case. Cassidy had surrendered to Philadelphia police on the afternoon of June 17, 2005. The case took a turn when the primary witness withdrew his confession. On January 25, 2006, Cassidy was convicted of involuntary manslaughter, two counts of aggravated assault and possession of an instrument of crime for his involvement in the shooting. He was sentenced to 11 to 23 months in prison plus probation, and was credited with the 7 months he had already served. He was released after serving 8 months in prison, and went on to relaunch the Larsiny Family which included then-member AR-Ab.


==== 2011 shootings ====
During an incident late-September 2011, West survived being shot ten times. A tweet dated September 24, 2011, showed a bandaged West lying in bed recuperating with the caption "10 shots couldn't stop me!!!" A previous Tweet confirmed he was in the hospital receiving treatment. He is reported to have suffered two shots to the stomach, two to the hand, five to the glutes and one shot to the thigh.


==== 2013 prison sentence ====
On April 13, 2013, media outlets reported on a tweet from rapper AR-Ab referring to a past crime which caught up to him. "3 years ago I got caught up in a big drug trafficking raid, it just caught up to me. Now I gottta pay da price. I'm doing my final show tonite", claimed the tweet. Speculations were abound whether he would be going to jail soon. On April 26, videographer Gil Videos uploaded a video with Ab revealing he will be turning himself in to the authorities. Following his prison sentence, music videos from AR-Ab and OBH members prominently featured the "Free AR-Ab" slogan, and urged fans to write to Abdul West while he's in prison. He was released on parole in November 2014, having served 18 months. According to interviews, Ab was booked for charges related to crack cocaine and faced up to 3 years, which was hastened to 18 months through his participation in the boot camp program.


==== Feud with Meek Mill ====
Drake referenced West on his song "Back to Back" where he says "I drove here in the Wraith playin' AR-Ab". West later appeared on VladTV in August 2015 saying that while he hasn't signed on to Drake's OVO Sound and sided with him saying he was disappointed in Mill's response. Mill responded on August 6 during a performance in Camden, New Jersey where he said "Fuck AR-Ab" and questioned his allegiance to an out-of-town rapper. West responded by releasing his own version of "Back to Back" freestyle on August 8 which dissed Mill and also contained violent lyrics where he threatened to unleash his "shooters" upon Mill. In response, Meek's cousin Omelly released his own version of "Back to Back" freestyle which dissed AR-Ab and also contained violent lyrics. AR-Ab did another interview on VladTV where he said Mill was too scared to respond himself and Omelly was the "softest one on Dream Chasers". He also told that he won't respond to Omelly's diss because he's a "worker". In January 2016, West revealed that he and Mill had reconciled.


==== 2018 indictment ====
In October 2018, West, alongside eight others said to be members of a drug trafficking organization, were indicted on counts of distributing drugs in North Philadelphia. His charges include a conspiracy to distribute, the possession, and the distribution of cocaine, crack, methamphetamine, and heroin. The indictment identified West as the leader of the gang, and that the gang obtained high-end properties in Philadelphia to protect their supply. On November 19, 2019, West was found guilty of several counts of conspiracy and distribution of crack cocaine, heroin, and methamphetamine in the federal conspiracy case. On April 15, 2021, West was sentenced to 45 years in prison.


== Discography ==
MixtapesWelcome to Trapstreet (2008)
I See Dead People (2009)
Allegheny AB (2010)
Who Harder Than Me (2011)
Who Harder Than Me II (2012)
Mud Musik (2013)
Mud Musik II (2015)
Who Harder Than Me III (2016)
Protocol Vol 1 (2017)
Protocol Vol 2 (2017)
Protocol Vol 3 (2017)
Protocol Vol 4 (2018)


== References ==


== External links ==
AR-Ab on TwitterAbraham Orellana (born June 16, 1989), better known as his stage name AraabMuzik ( AY-rab-mew-zik; stylized as araabMUZIK), is an American record producer and DJ. He made a name for himself by performing beats and instrumentals live and in real time on a AkaiPro Music Production Center (MPC) drum machine. He uses MPC to produce rapid, rhythmic drum patterns and creates melodies with samples and other sounds.Araabmuzik's musical style includes electronic dance music and hip hop, with live elements making a significant contribution to his sound. He has performed on the electronic dance music festival circuit and other live club performances. Over the years, Araabmuzik has continued to build his fame through releasing solo instrumental projects, and producing for hip hop artists such as Cardi B, Jay Electronica, Dave East, Cam'ron, ASAP Rocky, Fabolous, Kollegah and Joe Budden.


== Biography ==


=== 1989-2005: Early life and career beginnings ===
Araabmuzik was born and raised in Providence, Rhode Island, into a musical household. His mother was a professional singer. He is the middle child of three and is of Dominican and Guatemalan ancestry. Abraham has said he learned to play the drums at age three and later began playing the keyboard.Despite not being well known for it, Abraham found a lot of hip hop inspiration in his native home town of Providence. "There's definitely a lot of Hip-Hop here. You'll find a lot of local rap groups, solo artists out here that are trying make it, it's just the fact that we're not on the map like that just yet."Having a musical background lead to Araabmuzik to begin producing hip hop, and had begun getting traction in the industry at a very early age. Having a natural inkling towards the MPC, he went on to buy his first unit in 2005. By 2006, at age 17, he had begun being noticed by Diplomat Records.


== Career ==


=== 2006–2010: Diplomats ===
After meeting with record producer and A&R of Diplomat Records, DukeDaGod in 2006, he became affiliated with the Dipset label. He began making beats for Diplomat artists such as Hell Rell and Cam'ron.In 2009, AraabMuzik was featured as a main producer on rapper Cam'ron's album Crime Pays, producing the single "Get It in Ohio". From 2009 to 2010, he contributed many instrumentals to a series of mixtapes called Boss of All Bosses by Cam'ron and upcoming rapper Vado.


=== 2010–2015: Trance Party & Electronic Dream ===
In 2010, The Diplomats released Dipset Trance Party, an instrumental mixtape featuring artists (including AraabMuzik) employing a style that melded trance music with hip hop influences. This would prove to become a large influence on AraabMuzik's future sound. His track "South Beach" sampled Alice Deejay's "Better Off Alone", which AraabMuzik has said sparked his signature samples of electronic music.The first popularization of his new sound appeared in the comeback single "Salute" of rap group The Diplomats, also in 2010. In an interview with NPR he called "Salute" a different sound "that pretty much got me into the EDM".AraabMuzik released his breakout independent project Electronic Dream in 2011, which brought this signature sound of his production to the forefront. It was met with largely positive reviews and garnered him a large enough audience to begin touring internationally, getting booked for various clubs and shows to perform his music using the drum machine as an instrument.Along with additional releases, Abraham also steadily gained more popularity from videos on YouTube of him using the MPC to make live beats and drum patterns. He was also featured on the Akai Pro website as an official Akai Pro artist, alongside other MPC users such as Alchemist and DiViNCi.


=== 2016: Dream World ===
To complement Electronic Dream's sound and success, AraabMuzik began working on a full length official album Dream World, slated for a 2015 release. However, it ended up being delayed numerous times; he was quoted saying "I pushed it back so I could still really perfect it and work on it more, because I didn't really feel like I was satisfied with it."Dream World was released in July 2016, to generally favorable reviews. Although initially meant to sound like Electronic Dream, AraabMuzik decided to venture into a more eclectic album, catering to fans of different genres, both Electronic and Hip Hop, as well as experimental beats such as "War Cry".


== Artistry ==


=== Artist name ===
Abraham's artist name was given to him by a friend when he began producing - initially Young Arab, "I pretty much just ran with it, added an extra 'a' to it, and then later down the line I added 'muzik." Although the name has caused confusions about his origins, he became very famous very quickly, resulting in it being too late to change it. "It's something I'm stuck with, like you have your first phone number and you never changed it throughout the years, you just kept it."


=== Influences ===
Abraham has cited Swizz Beatz as a major influence, and the two have said to have a brotherly relationship. He's gone on to say, "He had his own distinguished sound. He was always using the keyboards and playing his own stuff. Nothing was sounding like anything he was doing." Other influences include Dr. Dre, Premier, J Dilla, 9th Wonder, and Alchemist.


=== Production style ===
AraabMuzik's style often employs samples arranged and triggered in real time on the MPC drum machine, with fast-paced drum patterns involving rapid hi-hats and kick drums. He has used samples from a variety of music, including electro, dubstep, trap, gabber, and trance music. Although his main tool is still an Akai Music Production Center (MPC) drum machine, he has also used keyboard controllers and occasionally live drums.
In 2020 during the COVID-19 pandemic he decided to spend time sharpening his skills on the Akai Music Production Center (MPC) drum machine. 
He has worked with several artists including ASAP Rocky and ASAP Mob, Cam'ron, Azealia Banks, Vado, The Diplomats, Hell Rell, Jadakiss, Busta Rhymes, 50 Cent, ArJaye the King, Eminem, and Slaughterhouse among others.


=== Creative process ===
In an interview Araabmuzik revealed that he made all of his music while sober. Araabmuzik has sampled 187 songs from other artists, including The Who's "Won't Get Fooled Again" which he restyled as "Outer Limits."


== Controversies ==
In November 2012, trance producer Adam K accused Araabmuzik of plagiarism for the records that he had sampled on Electronic Dream without giving proper credit.In early May 2013, AraabMuzik was shot in an attempted robbery. He was walking around his neighborhood in the company of his friends when several men attempted to take his money. He resisted and was shot in the process.In October 2015, a track was supposedly leaked from the unreleased Dream World album featuring R&B artist Kelela, named "Final Hour", much to Kelela's disappointment and frustrations which she expressed on Twitter. Araabmuzik's management released an official PR release claiming no responsibility for the leak.
In February 2016, AraabMuzik was shot again as a victim of an attempted robbery in Harlem. He had gunshot wounds to his jaw and arm.Abraham has spoken very little about these incidents having said "There's really not much to speak on [with] something like that" in an interview with Noisey.


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===
2011: Electronic Dream
2012: Electronic Dream 2
2016: Dream World


=== Mixtapes ===
2010: AraabMuzik Beatz Vol. 1
2010: AraabMuzik Beatz Vol. 2
2010: Instrumental Kings Part 5 (with J. Armz)
2012: Instrumental University
2013: For Professional Use Only
2013: The Remixes, Vol. 1
2014: For Professional Use Only 2


=== EPs ===
2012: Daytrotter Session
2015: KING
2015: Goon Loops
2017: ONE of ONE
2018: Goon Loops 2
2019: The Last Instrumental
2021: Trap Soul - EP
2021: Soulful Vocals - EP


== References ==


== External links ==
Official websiteArkatech Beatz (formerly known as The Infinite Arkatechz) are a platinum American music production team from New York City, now based in Atlanta.  Arkatech Beatz consists of members Collin "Jugrnaut" Dewar and Michael "Mike "Trauma" D" Dewar. They were affiliated with Loud Records/Sony Music Entertainment as A&R executives, and have composed, written, and produced music for gold and multi-platinum selling artists such as Big Pun, Nas, Raekwon, Prodigy of Mobb Deep, Mýa, Waka Flocka Flame, Jadakiss of The Lox, Killer Mike, Freddie Gibbs, Cyhi Da Prynce and others. Arkatech Beatz were also affiliated with Wu Tang Clan's American Cream Team as well as written and composed music for various movies such as the controversial 1999 drama film, Black and White, All The Women I've Loved, and others. Arkatech Beatz are also hosts of The Arkatech Beatz Music Business Podcast, and authors of the books, The Songwriter's Guide To Song Registration, The Musician's Guide To Music Copyrights, and The Ultimate Guide to Forming Your Own Music LLC.


== Discography ==


=== Big Pun – Capital Punishment ===
"Capital Punishment"


=== Big Pun – Yeeeah Baby ===
"Leather Face"


=== Game – The Documentary (DVD) ===
"Never Be Friends"


=== Terror Squad – The Album ===
"Triple Threat" (Feat. Big Pun, Armageddon & Cuban Link)


=== Nas – The Lost Tapes (Japan Edition) ===
"Worst Enemy"


=== Nas – Nas & Ill Will Records Presents QB's Finest ===
"Kids In The PJs" (Feat. Bravehearts)
"Self Conscience" (Feat. Prodigy)


=== Raekwon – Immobilarity ===
"Intro" (Immobilarity)
"Live From NY"
"Casabalanca"
"Jury" (Feat. Kim Stephens)
"The Table" (Feat Masta Killa)


=== Raekwon – Whiteboys (soundtrack) ===
"Respect Power"


=== Raekwon – Black and White (soundtrack) ===
"It's Not A Game" (Feat. American Cream Team & RZA)


=== Lord Superb – Black and White (1999 drama film) ===
"Superbs World"


=== Black and White (1999 drama film) ===


=== Raekwon – Unreleased ===
"Black Harrison"
"Rae Roc Realty
"Vampire Bats"


=== Boot Camp Click – Duck Down Presents: The Album ===
"Sleepers" (Feat. Illa Noyz & Rock)


=== Killarmy – Fear, Love & War ===
"Nonchalantly"
"Lady Sings The Blues" (Feat. Kim Stephens)


=== Obie Trice – Unreleased ===
"What You Want"


=== Sean Baker ===
"Passion Party"
"I Love You"
"Let's Dance"


=== Max B ===
"Why You Do That"


=== Mýa – Sugar & Spice ===
"Back To Disco"
"Back To Disco" Remix (Feat. Yung Joc) (Unreleased)


=== Mýa – Untitled ===
"Born A Star" (Unreleased)


=== Lil Scrappy – Tha Grustle (Unreleased) ===
"Big Boi Talking"


=== Shawty Lo – I Am Carlos (Unreleased) ===
"About My B.I" (Feat. Mýa)


=== Mýa – Beauty & the Streets Vol. 1 ===
Shawty Lo – "About My B.I" (Feat. Mýa)


=== Aasim ===
"Paper Thin"


=== Spider Loc ===
"My Block" (LAX)


=== Topic ===
"Still Got A Ways 2 Go"


=== Shawty Lo ===
"Let's Get It" Remix (Feat. DG Yola)


=== DG Yola ===
"Get Money"(Got Doe) (Unreleased)


=== Triple C's ===
"Murder Capital" (Feat. Torch & Young Breed)


=== Fabo – Untitled ===
"You Ready" (Unreleased)
"Highway"   (Unreleased)


=== FrontStreet of D4L ===
"Straight Outta Bankhead" (Feat. Sean Baker)


=== DJ Holiday & Alley Boy – Definition of Fuck Shit ===
"I'm Strapped"
"Rapping & Robbing" (Feat. Princess of Crime Mob & Waka Flocka Flame)
"50 Bars of Poison"
"Get To It"


=== DJ Scream, Jon Geezy & Parlae – Blood Brothers ===
"Blood Money"


=== DJ Scream – Heavy In The Streets 15 ===
Lil Hot – "H.I.T.S"


=== Alley Boy ===
"Fuck You Too"


=== Supa Sport – Life In Da Fastlane ===
"M.O.N.E.Y" (Feat. Meek Mill)


=== Slick Boy Ziggy – Intent 2 Distribute ===
"Intent 2 Distribute"


=== DJ Greg Street & Eldorado Red – Jeffe Music: The G5 Edition ===
"Shooters On Standby" (Feat. Alley Boy & Trouble)


=== DJ Swamp Izzo & Pesci – H.N.I.C ===
"Speculation"


=== DJ Drama & Currensy – Verde Terrace ===
"One For Da Wave"


=== All The Women I've Loved (2011 Film) ===


=== Freddie Gibbs – Cold Day In Hell ===
"Let Ya Nuts Hang" (Feat. Scrilla)


=== DJ Swamp Izzo & Pesci – Duct Tape Land ===
"Duct Tape Land"


=== Alley Boy- Nigganati ===
"Ain't Loyal" (Feat. Trouble)


=== Blac Keef & Supa Sport – Contraband ===
"Contraband"
"Block Burner"


=== Eldorado Red – McRado's 2 ===
Bricks & Bails (Feat. A Mafia & Bambino Gold)


=== Blood Money Kartel – Alkkeda N Dekkatur ===
Pesci "Never Ran"(Feat. Zone 6 & Killer Mike)


=== Sean Baker – This Love Shit Crazy ===
Dawn
Fuck or Fight
This Love Shit Crazy
Don't Leave Me Lonely (ft. Killer Mike)
Troubles Away


=== Waka Flocka Flame – Triple F Life: Friends, Fans and Family ===
"Power of My Pen"


=== MTV Made (TV series) ===
Season 13 Episode 2


=== Arkatech Beatz – Arkatech Beatz Instrumentals Vol 1 ===


=== Alley Boy – Gift Of Discernment ===
"Tongue Powerful"


=== Cyhi the Prynce – Ivy League: Kick Back ===
"Start A War"


=== Eldorado Red – White Power ===
"Warfare" ft Trouble


=== Jadakiss – "Top 5 Dead or Alive" ===
"Realest In The Game"(ft. Young Buck and Sheek Louch)


=== Arkatech Beatz – Theatre of War ===


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Arkatech Beatz at IMDb
Arkatech Beatz at IMDbM. K. Asante (born November 3, 1982) is an American author, filmmaker, recording artist, and professor. He is the author of the 2013 best-selling memoir Buck.


== Early life and education ==
Born in Harare, Zimbabwe and raised in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, Asante is the son of scholar Molefi Kete Asante and choreographer Kariamu Welsh.
Asante is a graduate of The Crefeld School. He studied film and literature at the University of London, School of Oriental and African Studies, earned a BA in Africana Studies and English from Lafayette College, and an M.F.A. in Screenwriting from UCLA School of Theater Film and Television.


== Career ==


=== Books ===
Asante is the author of four books, most notably Buck (2013), a memoir about his troubled youth in Philadelphia. Buck was selected as a Barnes & Noble Discover Great New Writers pick and made the Washington Post bestseller list in 2014 and 2015. It was also included on the In the Margins Book List in 2014. Poet Maya Angelou, who mentored Asante, described Buck as "a story of surviving and thriving with passion, compassion, wit, and style."HarperCollins publishing imprint Amistad Press has announced the publication of Nephew: A Memoir in Four-Part Harmony by Asante, to be released May 21, 2024.


=== Films ===
Asante is a Sundance Institute Feature Film Fellow for the movie adaptation of his memoir Buck. Asante wrote and produced the 2005 documentary 500 Years Later, a documentary about slavery which received the Breaking the Chains Award from UNESCO. Asante directed and produced The Black Candle (2012), a documentary about Kwanzaa, co-written and narrated by Maya Angelou.


=== Lectures and essays ===
Asante has delivered numerous lectures, including the Yale University Master's Tea; Vanderbilt University Walter R. Murray Jr. Lecture; Southern Methodist University Willis M. Tate Distinguished Lecture; and commencement addresses at UCLA, University of Wisconsin, Arizona State University, Vassar, and Harvard University.
Asante is featured in Changing America: 1968 and Beyond, a permanent exhibit at the Smithsonian National Museum of African American History and Culture.
Asante has written essays on art, Hip Hop, technology, and culture for USA Today, Huffington Post, San Francisco Chronicle, and The New York Times.


=== Music ===
Asante is featured on the song "Bangers", along with Halo, from the album Indie 500 by Talib Kweli and 9th Wonder.
Asante is the founder of Wonderful Sound Studios.
As a Songwriter, Asante wrote the lyrics for the 2023-2024 official Monday Night Football anthem, "In the Air Tonight", performed by Snoop Dogg, Chris Stapleton, and Cindy Blackman Santana.


=== Professor ===
At 23, he joined the faculty of Morgan State University. He received tenure at 26 and is currently associate professor of creative writing and film in the Department of English and Language Arts. In 2017, he was appointed to Distinguished Professor-in-Residence at the MICA (Institute of Strategic Marketing and Communication) in India.He is the recipient of the 2021 Morgan State University Distinguished Achievement Award.


=== TV shows ===
Asante is the host and co-executive producer of While Black with MK Asante, a docuseries produced by Snapchat. While Black with MK Asante takes the stories of America's black youth and gives them a platform in the smartphones of millions of America's teens. While Black with MK Asante has nearly 17 million viewers.Asante co-wrote the broadcast opening short films for the 2021 NBA Finals on ABC directed by Spike Lee.


=== TV performances ===
On November 30, 2020, he performed and debuted "We the Eagles" on ESPN's NFL Monday Night Football for a live audience of 11.4 million viewers.On May 29, 2021, he performed and debuted "Skate or D.I.E." at the 2021 Dew Tour Skateboarding Olympic qualifier on NBC.
On October 11, 2021, he co-wrote, co-produced, and starred in the intro for ESPN's NFL Monday Night Football week 5 featuring the Indianapolis Colts Vs. Baltimore Ravens. In the intro, Asante is backed by the Morgan State University Marching Band and garnered 11.4 million viewers.


== Awards and honors ==
2002: Jean Corrie Poetry Prize – Academy of American Poets
2005: Best Documentary (500 Years Later) – Pan African Film Festival
2006: Best Int'l Documentary (500 Years Later) – Harlem Int'l Film Festival
2006: Best Documentary (500 Years Later) – Bridgetown Film Festival
2007: Breaking the Chains Award (500 Years Later) – United Nations' UNESCO
2008: Best Documentary (The Black Candle) – Africa World Documentary Film Festival
2009: Langston Hughes Award from the Langston Hughes Society
2009: The Key to the City of Dallas, TX
2010: Board of director's Best Documentary (Motherland) – Pan African Film Festival
2011: Best Documentary (Motherland) – Zanzibar International Film Festival
2012: Best Director (The Black Candle) – Arkansas Black Film Festival
2012: Outstanding Young Writer – Middle Atlantic Writers Association
2013: Discover Great New Writers (Buck: A Memoir) – Barnes & Noble
2013: Best Book of 2013 (Buck: A Memoir) – Baltimore Magazine
2013: Inspirational Memoir finalist (Buck: A Memoir) – Books for a Better Life Award
2014: Washington Post Bestseller List – Paperback Nonfiction #6 (Buck: A Memoir)
2014: Alex Award finalist (Buck: A Memoir) – American Library Association
2014: TheGrio 100 List – MSNBC The Grio
2014: Feature Film Program Fellow – Sundance Institute
2014: Outstanding Literary Work – Autobiography finalist (Buck: A Memoir) – NAACP Image Awards
2014: In the Margins Book Award (Buck: A Memoir)
2015: Washington Post Bestseller List – Paperback Nonfiction #3 (Buck: A Memoir)
2016: Chancellor's Medallion – Fayetteville State University
2017: Distinguished Professor-in-Residence – MICA (Institute of Strategic Marketing and Communication)
2018: Great Stories Club – American Library Association (Buck: A Memoir)
2019: Lifetime Achievement Award - Muslim-Christian Alliance of Philadelphia
2020: Best in Social Activism (Finalist) - Shorty Awards (While Black with MK Asante)
2020: Short Form Series (Nomination) Critics' Choice Real TV Awards (While Black with MK Asante)
2021: Presidential Citation - MSU Distinguished Achievement Award - Morgan State University


== Books ==
Like Water Running Off My Back (Africa World Press, 2002)
Beautiful. And Ugly Too (Africa World Press, 2005)
It's Bigger Than Hip Hop (St. Martin's Press, 2008)
Buck: A Memoir (Spiegel & Grau / Penguin Random House, 2013)
Nephew: A Memoir (Amistad / HarperCollins, 2024)


== Films ==
500 Years Later (2005)
The Black Candle (2008)
Motherland (2010)
Buck (in development)


== TV shows ==
While Black with MK Asante (2019–)
Free Tuition with MK Asante (2020–)


== Music ==


=== Songwriter ===
2023: "In the Air Tonight" - Snoop Dogg, Chris Stapleton, Cindy Blackman Santana (Produced by Dave Cobb) (Written by Phil Collins and MK Asante)


=== Albums ===
2015: Buck: Original Book Soundtrack by MK Asante


=== Singles ===
2013: "The Color Grey" – Bishop Lamont ft. Mykisha Thomas and MK Asante (produced by Chris Noxx)
2014: "My Victory" – MK Asante ft. Maya Angelou (produced by J Dilla)
2014: "The Bulletin" – MK Asante ft. Uzi (produced by Faze Miyake)
2015: "Young Bucks" – MK Asante ft. Mez (Produced by J-Mac and Commissioner Gordon)
2020: "We the Eagles" - MK Asante (Produced by Mez)
2021: "Skate or D.I.E." - MK Asante (Produced by The Brightness)


=== Features ===
2013: "Godz N The Hood" – Ras Kass ft. Bishop Lamont, MK Asante and Talib Kweli (produced by Chris Noxx)
2015: "Rap Psalms" – MK Asante ft. Narcy (Produced by Thanks Joey)
2015: "Bangers" – MK Asante and Halo (Produced by Nottz)
2016: "Runnin" – Ace Clark ft. MK Asante (Produced by Scarecrow Beats)


== References ==


== External links ==
Official websiteGabriel C. Benn (born December 29, 1974), better known as Asheru, is an American rapper, educator, and youth activist. He performed the opening and closing themes for the popular TV series, The Boondocks.


== Early life and music ==
As a youth, Asheru's musical influences were a wide range of hip hop artists as well as Soul, R&B, and Pop from the 1970s and 1980s that his mother used to play. He graduated from high school at 16 and attended the University of Virginia, where he graduated in 1996 with a B.A. in Anthropology. His classmate Wesley Jackson founded an independent Hip Hop label, Seven Heads Entertainment, which in 1996 signed the group Unspoken Heard, made up of Asheru and Jackson's older brother, Robert Jackson, known as Blue Black. Asheru and Blue Black released a series of 12" singles and EPs, and in 2001 released their first album, Soon Come. In 2003, the group released their second album 48 Months, followed by the No Edge Ups in South Africa album, a compilation album of other Seven Heads artists featuring the single "Mood Swing", with Talib Kweli.
Asheru has performed throughout Europe, Canada, the US and Japan, both solo and with Unspoken Heard, as well as collaborating on projects with artists such as Pete Rock and DJ Jazzy Jeff. He currently travels with a live band, The ELs.


== The Boondocks ==
Asheru collaborated with Aaron McGruder to write and perform several songs for the TV series, The Boondocks, including the show's theme song.  Asheru's contribution to the controversial episode "Return of the King" won the Peabody Award for Journalism in 2006, the first rapper to win such an award.


== Education ==
Asheru has also taught in the Washington, D.C. school system since 1997, in curriculum development and arts-based instruction. In 2004, he completed a master's degree in education from National-Louis University. He founded a community arts organization and independent music label, Guerilla Arts Ink, and currently serves as Director of Arts Integration at Ballou Senior High School in Washington, D.C. He also works with schools and juvenile detention centers to promote literacy as an intervention against youth violence, crime, unemployment, and incarceration.In 2005, Asheru co-founded Educational Lyrics, a publishing company that produces cross-curricular teaching materials, such as the Hip-Hop Educational Literacy Program (HELP), a series of supplemental reading workbooks that use hip-hop lyrics to teach critical analysis and multicultural relevance to students of all reading levels.


== Discography ==
Cosmology EP...Unspoken Heard (1997)
Better/Smiley 12"... Unspoken Heard (1998)
Jamboree EP ... Asheru (1999)
Soon Come LP ... Unspoken Heard (2001)
48 Months LP... Unspoken Heard (2003)
Mood Swing 12"... Asheru feat. Talib Kweli & Raheem DeVaughn (2003)
No Edge Ups in South Africa ...Seven Heads Entertainment (2003)
Black Moses 12".... Asheru (2005)
Insomnia Vol.1 LP... Asheru (2006)
Insomnia Vol.1: Sleepless in Japan…(IMPORT ONLY) (2006)
Hip-Hop Docktrine: The Official Boondocks Mixtape... Asheru, various artists (2006)
3 Stars, 2 Bars EP... Asheru (2007)
Hip-Hop Docktrine 2 (The Saga Continues)... Asheru, various artists (2007)
"Insight" on Fort Knox Five Album Radio Free DC (2008)
"I am Hip Hop" on Clin d'oeil Album with Jazz Liberatorz (2008)
Hip-Hop Docktrine 3 (The Final Chapter)... Asheru, various artists (2010)
Sleepless in Soweto LP.... Asheru (2013)


== References ==


== External links ==
Burton, Orisanmi. "Asheru: Education, MCing & The Bonototiousondocks...". Allhiphop.com. August 14, 2008. May 26, 2010.
http://www.edlyrics.comMark Vincent Woodford (born May 24, 1984 in Madison, Wisconsin), better known by his stage name The Audible Doctor, is a Brooklyn-based American record producer and underground rapper. The Audible Doctor has been credited as producer in critically acclaimed studio albums and EPs including Made In The Streets, 2057, The Ports, Reporting Live, Computer Era, Free Agent and Thug Matrix 3. On 3 January 2014, he was listed in AllHipHop 's "Top 50 Underground/Indie/Emerging Artists Of 2013" before he went on to make a guest appearance at the 2014 edition of the annual Brooklyn Hip-Hop Festival. He is a member of the Brown Bag AllStars, a group of emcees he joined while interning at Fat Beats in 2007.


== Biography ==
Born and raised in Madison, Wisconsin, The Audible Doctor started music having piano and guitar lessons while growing up until his days in high school when he started collecting records and DJing at friends' parties.In 2002, The Audible Doctor moved to New York to attend an audio engineering and recording school before he started working at Fat Beats store after graduating from college. While interning at Fat Beats, he collaborated with funk group Skull Snaps to release his first production project titled Skull Snaps Meet The Audible Doctor in 2005 and It's A New Day Redux in 2006.In 2010, The Audible Doctor left Fat Beats and released his first solo EP titled The Crackers then Brownies Deluxe in 2011. He had his first major break as a producer after he was credited in Joell Ortiz's second studio album entitled Free Agent, an album that debuted at #173 on the Billboard 200 with 4,000 copies sold in its first week released.On 25 September 2012, The Audible Doctor released his critically acclaimed EP titled I Think That... which further earned him more attention from music critics before he went on to release an album titled Doctorin on 30 October 2012. On 24 November 2014, he released an EP titled Can't Keep The People Waiting, the EP featured vocal appearances from acts like Astro, Hassan Mackey of Mello Music Group, Consequence, Bumpy Knuckles, Guilty Simpson and John Robinson.On 20 June 2015, The Audible Doctor released an EP entitled The Spring Tape off his Seasons EP set which include The Winter Tape and The Summer Tape. His style of production has seen him work with notable acts like 50 Cent for the freestyle titled "This Is Murder Not Music," Astro, Koncept, Fredro Starr, Joell Ortiz, and many more.


== Discography ==


== References ==


== External links ==
The Audible Doctor on Twitter 
The Audible Doctor on SoundCloud 
The Audible Doctor discography at Discogs
The Audible Doctor at AllMusic
Official websiteNora Lum (born June 2, 1988), known professionally as Awkwafina, is an American actress, rapper, and comedian. She rose to prominence in 2012 when her rap song "My Vag" became popular on YouTube. She then released her debut album, Yellow Ranger (2014), and appeared on the MTV comedy series Girl Code (2014–2015). She expanded to films with supporting roles in the comedies Neighbors 2: Sorority Rising (2016), Ocean's 8 (2018), Crazy Rich Asians (2018), and Jumanji: The Next Level (2019). For her starring role as a grieving young woman in The Farewell (2019), Awkwafina won a Golden Globe Award.
Since 2020, Awkwafina has served as co-creator, writer, and executive producer of the Comedy Central series Awkwafina Is Nora from Queens, in which she also plays a fictionalized version of herself. In 2021, she portrayed Katy in the Marvel Cinematic Universe superhero film Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings. She has also performed voice roles in the animated films The Angry Birds Movie 2 (2019), Raya and the Last Dragon (2021), The Bad Guys (2022), and in the musical The Little Mermaid (2023).


== Early life ==
Awkwafina was born in Stony Brook, New York, to Wally Lum, a Chinese American, and Tia Lum, a Korean American. Her father worked in the information technology field, and comes from a family of restaurateurs – his father immigrated to the United States in the 1940s, and opened the Cantonese restaurant Lum's in Flushing, Queens, one of the neighborhood's first Chinese restaurants. Her mother was a painter who immigrated with her family to the United States from South Korea in 1972. She died from pulmonary hypertension in 1992 when Awkwafina was four, and Awkwafina was subsequently raised by her father and paternal grandparents. She became especially close to her paternal grandmother, Powah Lum.Awkwafina grew up in Forest Hills, Queens, and attended Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School, where she played the trumpet and was trained in classical music and jazz. At age 15, she adopted the stage name Awkwafina, "definitely a person I repressed" and an alter ego to her "quiet and more passive" personality during her college years. From 2006 to 2008, she learned Mandarin at Beijing Language and Culture University to communicate with her paternal grandmother without barriers. She majored in journalism and women's studies at the University at Albany, State University of New York and graduated in 2011.


== Career ==
Awkwafina began rapping at 13. She got her start producing music with GarageBand but eventually learned Logic Pro and Ableton. In 2012, her song "My Vag" became popular on YouTube. She originally wrote the song in college as a response to Mickey Avalon's "My Dick (Tribute to Nate)". She was fired from her job at a publishing house when her employer recognized her in the video. Her solo hip-hop album Yellow Ranger was released on February 11, 2014. Its 11 tracks include a number of her previous singles released on YouTube, including the title track "Yellow Ranger", "Queef" and "NYC Bitche$". In 2014, Awkwafina appeared in six episodes of the third and fourth seasons of Girl Code. In 2015 she co-hosted its spin-off, Girl Code Live, on MTV.
In 2016, she collaborated with comedian Margaret Cho on "Green Tea", a song that pokes fun at Asian stereotypes. She was part of the lineup at Tenacious D's Festival Supreme on October 25, 2014. She was also a disc jockey (DJ) at bars in New York. She is profiled in the 2016 documentary Bad Rap, an official selection at the 2016 Tribeca Film Festival. It puts the spotlight on her and Asian-American rappers such as Dumbfoundead, Rekstizzy and Lyricks. She released a 7-track EP, In Fina We Trust, on June 8, 2018; it won the 2019 A2IM Libera Award for Best Hip-Hop/Rap Album. Awkwafina hosted the short-form talk show web series Tawk for the digital production company Astronauts Wanted from 2015 to 2017. The first season premiered on YouTube and was picked up for exclusive streaming on Verizon’s Go90 platform. It was an Official Honoree at the 2016 Webby Awards and was nominated for a 2016 Streamy Award in the News and Culture category. In 2016 she played a supporting role as Christine, a member of Kappa Nu in Neighbors 2: Sorority Rising, and voiced Quail in the animated comedy film Storks. In 2018 she starred in the indie comedy Dude, playing Rebecca, one of four best friends. She was among the principal cast in Ocean's 8, the all-female spinoff to the Ocean's Trilogy. She then co-starred in the film Crazy Rich Asians, directed by Jon M. Chu, playing Goh Peik Lin, a Singaporean college friend of lead character Rachel Chu (Constance Wu). She had a recurring role in the Hulu original series Future Man in 2017. She hosted the 2018 iHeartRadio MMVAs.Awkwafina hosted the October 6, 2018, episode of Saturday Night Live, becoming the second East Asian-American woman to host the show (after Lucy Liu, whose episode Awkwafina cites as her inspiration to one day be famous enough to host SNL). She did an impression of Sandra Oh, who later in the season became the first East Asian-Canadian woman to host an SNL episode and the third East Asian woman to host overall.In 2019, Awkwafina starred in the film The Farewell, directed by Lulu Wang. She played Billi, a writer who visits her ill grandmother in China. The film received critical acclaim. Awkwafina received the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Motion Picture Comedy or Musical, becoming the first person of Asian descent to win a Golden Globe Award in any lead actress film category, after being only the sixth woman of Asian descent to be nominated in the lead actress in a musical or comedy category. In the same year, she starred as avatar Ming Fleetfoot in the film Jumanji: The Next Level, which was a commercial success. In July 2019, Awkwafina was cast as Katy in Marvel Studios' Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings alongside actors Simu Liu and Tony Leung Chiu-wai. Directed by Destin Daniel Cretton, the film was released in theaters on September 3, 2021, earning critical praise and grossing $430.5 million. She won the Saturn Award for Best Supporting Actress for her performance in Shang-Chi. In August 2019, Disney announced that Awkwafina would voice Sisu the dragon in the animated film Raya and the Last Dragon, which was released on March 5, 2021. Awkwafina improvised much of her dialogue for the film, drawing comparisons to Robin Williams' performance as the Genie in Aladdin.As of 2020, Awkwafina stars in the comedy series Awkwafina Is Nora from Queens; she is also a writer and executive producer of that show. As part of the promotional campaign, she recorded new announcements for the 7 train of the New York City Subway, making jokes, such as "This is Hunters Point Avenue, a friendly reminder that seats are for people, not your bag" and "This is 46th Street, which is a lucky number, I just learned that on the internet. Also learned that pigeons and doves are the same things, WHAT?!", at every stop. These recordings were used until the series premiered on January 22. In a season one episode, Simu Liu made a guest appearance before the release of Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings.


== Image and artistry ==
Awkwafina has said that Charles Bukowski, Anaïs Nin, Joan Didion, Tom Waits and Chet Baker were early influences.Before launching her entertainment career, she worked as an intern at the Gotham Gazette in New York City; as an intern at the Times Union newspaper in Albany, New York; and as a publicity assistant for publishing house Rodale Books, which fired her after they discovered her music videos. She later worked at a vegan bodega.Awkwafina has expressed support for Time's Up, a movement started by Hollywood celebrities against sexual harassment. She has also advocated for more female directors and against the stereotyping of Asians in media.She was featured in Gap's "Logo Remix" campaign, which featured up-and-coming artists who "are remixing creative culture on their own terms," such as SZA, Sabrina Claudio and Naomi Watanabe.In 2015, she released a guidebook, Awkwafina's NYC.Awkwafina was honored as Kore Asian Media's Female Breakout of the Year in 2017.On May 16, 2019, she headlined The Infatuation's annual food festival, EEEEEATSCON. She spoke about her upbringing in Queens, where her family owned a Cantonese restaurant.Awkwafina has developed a profile as a fashion model, appearing regularly on magazine covers, which she re-posts on her Instagram account. These include Vogue, Allure, Harpers Bazaar, Cosmopolitan, Marie Claire and feminist magazine Bust.


=== Cultural appropriation ===
Awkwafina has faced criticism for cultural appropriation of AAVE and mannerisms stereotypic of the African-American community. In 2018, she said, "I welcome that conversation because as an Asian-American identity, we're still trying to figure out what that is." On February 5, 2022, Awkwafina tweeted, "My immigrant background allowed me to carve an American identity off the movies and tv shows I watched, the children I went to public school with, and my undying love and respect for hip hop. I think as a group, Asian Americans are still trying to figure out what that journey means for them – what is correct and where they don't belong ... As a non-black POC, I stand by the fact that I will always listen and work tirelessly to understand the history and context of AAVE". Activists criticized this tweet as being several years late and unapologetic.


== Filmography ==


=== Film ===


=== Television ===


=== Web ===


== Discography ==


== Awards and nominations ==

Awkwafina was honored as Kore Asian Media's Female Breakout of the Year in 2017. For her performance in the comedy-drama film The Farewell, she received the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Motion Picture Comedy or Musical, the Satellite Award for Best Actress – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy, and the Santa Barbara International Film Festival Virtuoso Award, among numerous other nominations. Alongside the film's ensemble, she was nominated for the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Cast in a Motion Picture. Awkwafina also received a nomination for the BAFTA Rising Star Award.


== See also ==
Chinese people in New York City
Koreans in New York City
Asian Americans in arts and entertainment


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website 
Awkwafina on Instagram
Awkwafina discography at Discogs 
Awkwafina at IMDbAnthony Cruz (born March 9, 1972), better known by his stage name AZ, is an American rapper known for being a longtime and frequent music partner of East Coast rapper Nas and also a member of hip hop group The Firm alongside Nas, Foxy Brown, Cormega and Nature. Online magazine About.com listed AZ as the "Most Underrated [Rapper] of All Time". AZ also made it onto the sites' "Top 50 MCs of Our Time (1987–2007)", where he was reiterated as "arguably the most underrated lyricist ever."
AZ first became known by appearing on Nas's landmark 1994 album Illmatic on the song "Life's a Bitch", as well as featuring vocals on the opening track "The Genesis". AZ signed with EMI, and soon released his debut album, Doe or Die, in 1995, to critical acclaim. The album's lead single, "Sugar Hill", became AZ's major commercial success as a solo artist, reaching #25 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart and achieving Gold status. AZ's EMI contract was transferred to sister label Noo Trybe Records and Virgin Records when the EMI Label Group was shut down.
In 1997, AZ joined the group The Firm with Nas, Nature and Foxy Brown and released their only album as a group, The Album. In 1998, AZ released his second solo album, Pieces of a Man. The album fared well but did not chart quite as well as his debut and did not feature a crossover single like "Sugar Hill".
After this album's release, AZ signed with Motown and Universal Records and released 9 Lives. In 2002, he released Aziatic. A single from the album, "The Essence" (featuring Nas), was nominated at the 2003 Grammy Awards for Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group.


== Early life ==
AZ was born in Bedford–Stuyvesant, Brooklyn to an African-American mother and a Afro-Dominican father. He grew up in East New York, Brooklyn, with his mother and sister.AZ started writing rap lyrics when he was 12 years old. He attended Eli Whitney High School, with fellow Brooklyn rapper Jay-Z, until the vocational school closed down in the late 1980s. 
In the early 1990s, he became friends with Nas, a young rapper from Queens. Nas started working on his debut album Illmatic and invited  AZ to work with him in the studio. AZ appeared on the album intro and had a verse on "Life's a Bitch". After Illmatic was released in 1994, EMI Records offered AZ a record deal.


== Career ==


=== 1995–2001: Doe or Die, Pieces of a Man and 9 Lives ===
AZ's debut album Doe or Die was released by EMI Records on October 10, 1995. It features guest appearances by Nas and production from N.O. Joe, Pete Rock, L.E.S., and Buckwild, among others. Upon its release, Doe or Die received notable commercial success, peaking at #15 on the Billboard 200, and #1 on the U.S. Top R&B/Hip Hop Albums chart. Doe or Die was known for popularizing the theme of mafioso rap, alongside several albums, namely Jay-Z's Reasonable Doubt and Nas's It Was Written. Doe or Die produced several singles, including "Mo Money, Mo Murder, Mo Homicide", "Gimme Your's (remix)", "Doe or Die" and "Sugar Hill" – which was certified Gold by the RIAA in 1995.In 1998, Pieces of a Man, AZ's second album, was released on EMI. 9 Lives, his third album, peaked at #23 on the Billboard 200 and #4 on the Top Hip Hop / R&B Albums. The leading single, "Problems", with its accompanying music video, reached #34 on the Hot Rap Singles. After the release of the album, AZ left the label.


=== 2002–2007: Aziatic, A.W.O.L. and The Format ===
AZ's fourth album Aziatic features a duet between AZ and long-time friend and collaborator, Nas, "The Essence", which was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group. The album was mostly well received by critics, one such positive review from Brad Mills at Allmusic, states:
"AZ has been looked upon to do amazing things with his music. Has he lived up to those high expectations on this album he has from start to finish. The beats on this album are complex, inventive, and almost perfectly suited for AZ's style of rhyming. He's carefully crafted this album rather than slapped it together overnight to meet his quota, and it shows. It helps immensely that he's brought along people like DR Period, Az Izz, Nas, and Buckwild, but they don't outshine the younger AZ as he holds his own well. AZ has come up with his best work in a long time on this album."On September 6, 2005, A.W.O.L., his fifth album, was released, becoming the first AZ album to be released on his own imprint, Quiet Money Records.AZ's sixth studio album The Format features production from Lil' Fame of M.O.P., Face Defeat, Emile, J. Cardim, Phonte, Statik Selektah and DJ Premier. The album's lead single is its title track "The Format", which was produced by DJ Premier, with "Vendetta" as its B-Side. The Format also features the bonus track "Royal Salute", a retaliation to 50 Cent's song "What If" which included a line aimed at AZ. On October 7, 2007, Quiet Money released The Format (Special Edition), adding six bonus tracks including "Royal Salute."


=== 2008–present: Undeniable, Legendary and Doe or Die II ===
Undeniable, his seventh studio album, was released on April 1, 2008, through Quiet Money and Koch Records. The album debuted at number 141 on the U.S. Billboard 200 chart, selling over 25,000 copies in its first week. In October 2009, AZ confirmed he was working on a sequel to his debut studio album, titled Doe or Die 2. He hoped to enlist the original production team from Doe or Die such as L.E.S., Pete Rock, DR Period, and Buckwild. AZ also had ambitions on trying to acquire beats from DJ Toomp, Dr. Dre and Kanye West for the album, as well as reaching out to his old rhyme partner Nas. The first single from the album "Feel My Pain" was produced by Frank Dukes.In 2010, former member of Da Beatminerz Baby Paul confirmed he would be producing for the album and serving as executive producer. On November 30, 2010, he released a 15th anniversary edition of Doe or Die titled Doe or Die: 15th Anniversary. In 2010, Dr. Dre and Kanye West were said to be too busy to produce for the album, but AZ said he was patiently waiting for them to complete their next solo records so they could join the production team. He was also seeking production from DJ Premier. During a 2011 interview with XXLMag, AZ confirmed that Nas would be featured on the album.On March 27, 2012, AZ released the first street single from Doe or Die 2, "My Niggas", which features production from longtime collaborator Buckwild. The album's production includes tracks from Statik Selektah, Baby Paul and the original Doe or Die team of beatsmiths L.E.S., DR Period, Pete Rock, and Buckwild.In 2014, AZ was heavily featured on Ghostface Killah's album 36 Seasons.After several delays, Doe or Die II was released on September 10, 2021.


== Discography ==

Studio AlbumsDoe or Die (1995)
Pieces of a Man (1998)
9 Lives (2001)
Aziatic (2002)
A.W.O.L. (2005)
The Format (2006)
Undeniable (2008)
Legendary (2009)
Doe or Die II (2021)

Collaboration AlbumsThe Firm: The Album (1997)


== Awards and nominations ==
Grammy Awards


== References ==


== External links ==
AZ on TwitterApani Nicole Smith (born September 17, 1974) known professionally as Apani B. Fly, is an American hip hop emcee.
In 1996 her first 12-inch single, "Estragen", was independently released and shortly followed up by several high-profile guest appearances on projects with Organized Konfusion, Mos Def, Talib Kweli, Pharoahe Monch, Nujabes and MF Doom. Her first full-length album, Rhyme-Related (as a member of Polyrhythm Addicts), was released in 1999.She opened for acts such as Fugees and Brand Nubian. For the past decade, Apani has remained part of the NYC underground scene with frequent performances at S.O.B.'s, Lyricist Lounge, and the Nuyorican Poet's Cafe.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===
Rhyme Related (1999)
Story 2 Tell (2004)


=== Singles ===


== References ==


== External links ==
Apani B. Fly on Twitter
Apani B. Fly discography at Discogs
"Apani Is... (official website)". Archived from the original on February 14, 2015. Retrieved January 21, 2017.
"Apani B Fly Emcee". 2001-03-03. Archived from the original on 2017-02-02. Retrieved 2021-11-28. An old interview with Apani, dating from March 3, 2001Christopher E. Oroc, stage name Melvin Babu (born September 17, 1974), better known as DJ Babu or DJ Babu the Dilated Junkie, is a Filipino-American DJ and record producer. He is a member of DJ crew the Beat Junkies, Los Angeles-based hip hop trio Dilated Peoples together with Evidence and Rakaa Iriscience, and a member of the Likwit Junkies along with rapper Defari. He served as the curator and host of Soundcheck for Beat Junkie Radio on Dash Radio. As of 2017, DJ Babu is the Program Director and a lead instructor alongside fellow crew members Mr. Choc, Melo-D, DJ Rhettmatic, D-Styles and J.Rocc at the Beat Junkie Institute of Sound.


== Career ==
In his early years, Babu lived in Oxnard, California for one year, and later moved to the neighboring city of Camarillo; he currently resides in Los Angeles County.
Babu started as part of the Beat Junkies DJ crew, joining in by late 1993. He has won multiple competition titles Including the Vestax World Championships and multiple International Turntablist Federation titles. He has appeared in and hosted numerable videos. Babu is famous for redefining the art of Beat juggling during the 1997 ITF/Beat juggling category competition, when he first performed his "Blind Alley" routine. Under the name "The Turntablist", produced perhaps the genre's most popular battle record, 1996's Super Duck Breaks, which sold over 10,000 copies.
Along with rapper and record producer Evidence and rapper Rakaa, he released the debut Dilated Peoples' single "Third Degree" in 1997 for ABB Records. The trio's dropped their first studio album, The Platform, in 2000. Babu, Evidence and Pharoahe Monch are featured in the song "H! Vltg3" from Linkin Park's remix album Reanimation. DJ Babu has also featured on numerous acts alongside groups such as Jurassic 5, Swollen Members and the Visionaries. Individually Babu has been featured in many other groups, including his affiliation with the Likwit Crew, which led to form the Likwit Junkies duo with Defari. The duo's debut studio album, The L.J.'s, was released in March 2005 to generally favorable reviews from music critics.
Babu's latest endeavors include Dilated Peoples' 2014 release of their fifth studio album, Directors of Photography via Rhymesayers Entertainment label, which features tracks that were primarily produced by Evidence and Babu, with guest appearances from Vince Staples, Aloe Blacc, Action Bronson, Sick Jacken and Rapsody to name a few.
In 2014, the Beat Junkies crew launched their own membership based record pool curated by the members of the crew, including Babu. At the top of 2015, "Beat Junkie Radio" began airing on Dash Radio, the station stars all members of the crew, but led by Babu, Mr. Choc, and Rhettmatic. Their live show "Soundcheck' which aires live every 2nd and 4th Tuesday of the month has been ranked as one of the top 5 shows on Dash Radio.
Duck Season Vol. 4 is set to be released in 2018.
Aside Babu's musical accomplishments, his hobbies also include photography, with Babu being noted for his "behind the decks" shots of his turntables with Evidence and Rakaa during live shows, as well as landscape shots of his travels around the world with Dilated Peoples.
On January 18, 2017, The Beat Junkies formally announced plans to open their own DJ school (The Beat Junkie Institute of Sound) and Professional training facility. Babu leads in the introductory classes, intermediate/advanced level scratching, creative mixing and beat juggling classes.


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===
Super Duck Breaks (1996)
Super Duper Duck Breaks (2000)
Duck Season Vol. 1 (2002)
Duck Season Vol. 2 (2003)
The L.J.'s (with Defari, as the Likwit Junkies) (2005)
The Beat Tape Vol. 1 (2007)
Duck Season Vol. 3 (2008)
The Beat Tape Vol. 2 (2010)
No Apologies (with LMNO) (2010)


=== Featured ===
"Wild Stylus" (1997) [Scratches – tracks: A2 to A4, B1 to B2]


=== Singles ===
"Pay Attention" (2001)
"Duck Season" (2002)
"Fan Mail" (2007)


=== Production ===
"Funky Duck" Wild Stylus (1997)
"Service" Dilated Peoples (2000)
"Phil Da Agony Interlude" Dilated Peoples (2001)
"Proper Propaganda" Dilated Peoples (2001)
"Pay Attention" Dilated Peoples (2001)
"Hard Hitters" Dilated Peoples (2001)
"Dilated Junkies" Dilated Peoples (2001)
"Behold My Life" Defari (2002)
"Behold My Life (Remix)" Defari (2003)
"International" Chali 2na (2005)
"The L.J.'s" Likwit Junkies (2005)
"Alarm Clock Music" Dilated Peoples (2006)
"Burn Big" Defari (2006)
"Vultures" Defari (2006)
"Rain or Shine" Evidence (2008)
"C.T.D." Rakaa Iriscience (2010)
"Eyes Wide" Rakaa Iriscience (2010)
"Same Folks" Evidence (2011)
"No Gunz Come Out" Defari (2013)
"Lip Service" Defari (2013)
"Curveball" Defari (2013)
"Progressive 3" Vince Staples (2014)


== References ==


== External links ==
DJ Babu interview
Beat Junkie Sound
Beat Junkie Institute of Sound
Beat Junkie Record Pool
DJ Babu on Instagram
DJ Babu Interview at NAMM Oral History Collection (2020)Antonia D. Reed (born April 22, 1966), known professionally as Bahamadia, is an American hip-hop artist and singer. Bahamadia released her debut album, Kollage, in 1996, followed by the independently released EP BB Queen in 2000. She then released a full-length album, Good Rap Music, in 2005. Bahamadia has also released the singles “Dialed Up Vol. 1” (in 2013), “Here” (in 2015), and “Dialed Up Vol. 2” (in 2018).
Bahamadia has been a featured artist on tracks by musicians including The Roots, Jedi Mind Tricks, Erykah Badu, Morcheeba, Guru, and Towa Tei, among others.
In November 2016, Bahamadia appeared as a guest client on season 15 of Project Runway, in which her son, Mah-Jing Wong, was a contestant. His father is part Chinese, part African-American; he was named after his great-grandfather.


== Career ==
She was a music DJ in house parties around Philadelphia. She gained attention from Guru of Gang Starr in 1993 for her song on the EP Funk Vibes.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===


=== Singles ===


=== Guest appearances ===


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Bahamadia Official MySpace PageMilton Delano Martin III, better known by his stage name Marty Baller, is an American rapper, songwriter, dancer, actor, and model from the Harlem neighborhood of Manhattan, New York. Aside from his solo career, he was a member of the hip-hop group A$AP Mob and the official tour hype man to RCA Records recording artist ASAP Ferg. Marty Baller is often referred to as "Ferg's protégé" and the "Face of Traplord".Marty Baller gained recognition after releasing his debut single, "Big Timers" featuring ASAP Ferg, and the track "I'm A Dog", in collaboration with ASAP Ferg and Migos, on his debut mixtape Marty G Raw.Shortly after launching his solo career, Marty Baller collaborated with a variety of rappers including Lil Uzi Vert on Always Strive and Prosper, Rich The Kid, Smoke DZA and Fatman Scoop.


== Career ==
In 2007, Marty Baller joined the A$AP Mob crew, a Harlem-based collective of rappers, producers, music video directors, fashion designers, and bikers who shared similar interests in music, fashion, style, and art. It had been formed by A$AP Yams, A$AP Bari and A$AP Illz.Marty Baller's rapping skills were noticed by ASAP Ferg while growing up in Harlem. Marty also gained wider attention and notoriety after being mentioned on ASAP Ferg's single "Shabba" and "New Level". He also gained greater notoriety through weekly installments of Wavy Wednesdays through The Fader. In 2015, drawing up inspiration from the Big Tymers, Marty released the track "Big Timers" featuring ASAP Ferg to critical acclaim and later followed up the single.Marty then released his solo mixtape Marty G Raw on November 11, 2016 with guest features from ASAP Ferg and Migos.


== Musical style ==
According to XXL, Marty Baller "is carving out his own path in hip-hop. Noisey wrote "Marty Baller is breaking through. Previously known for a supporting role in A$AP Mob, he’s…putting out promising tracks and [is] ready".


== Influences ==
In an interview with The Hundreds, Marty Baller stated his influences are ASAP Rocky, ASAP Ferg, Jay-Z, Lil Wayne, Andre 3000 and Michael Jackson.


== Discography ==
Commercial mixtapesMarty G Raw (2016)
Baller Nation (2017)
International Baller (2018)
One Nation (2018)


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
ASAP Mob's websiteTiffany Lane (born August 16, 1974), better known by her stage name Charli Baltimore, is an American rapper and television personality. Her stage name is taken from Geena Davis's character in the film The Long Kiss Goodnight.


== Career ==
Charli Baltimore began her musical career when she met the Notorious B.I.G. in the summer of 1995, and they became involved in a romantic relationship. Several months into their relationship, she left him a voicemail of a rap verse that she had written and he began encouraging her to pursue a career in rap music.Following the death of B.I.G., Charli continued her career in the industry, booking several modeling jobs and creating a number of hip-hop and R&B songs including "Money", with Gamble and Huff, and "Stand Up", which rose to the top ten of the Billboard Magazine "Hot Rap Singles Chart".Despite her moderate success on the charts, Baltimore's first studio album Cold as Ice was never released. She continued to be in the rap industry, and joined Irv Gotti's label Murder Inc in 2002.During this time, Baltimore made appearances on songs, such as "Down 4 U", "We Still Don't Give a Fuck", and "No One Does It Better" from Irv Gotti Presents The Inc. She was also featured on Ja Rule's "Down Ass Bitch" and "The Last Temptation", as well as the Christina Milian track "Spending Time", and Ashanti's "Rain on Me" (remix). In 2003, she earned a Grammy Award nomination for Best Female Rap Solo Performance, for her single  "Diary". Baltimore parted ways with Irv Gotti and Murder Inc in 2004.In 2019, Charli was announced as a cast member on WeTV's Growing Up Hip Hop, with daughter, Sianni.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===
Cold as Ice (1999)


=== Unreleased albums ===
The Diary (You Think You Know) (2003)


=== Mixtapes ===
Natural Born Khronicles (2012)
Hard 2 Kill (2013)


=== Singles ===
"Money" (1998)
"Stand Up" (featuring Ghostface Killah) (1999)
"Feel It" (1999)
"Horse and Carriage (Remix)" (1999)
"Everybody Wanna Know" (2000)
"Charli" (2000)1
"Nobody Does It Better" (featuring Ashanti) (2002)
"Diary" (2002)
"Hey Charli" (2002)
"Come Test Us" (featuring Lil Wayne) (2007)
"Lose It" (2008)
"P.S." (2008)
"Machine Gun (Remix)" (featuring Sally Anthony) (2011)
"All Lies " (featuring Maino) (2012)
"Philly Stand Up" (featuring Dutch) (2012)
"B.M.B" (featuring Trick Trick) (2013)
"Hunnids" (featuring Trick Trick and Cash Paid) (2013)
"Bed Full of Money" (2015)


=== Featured singles ===


=== Guest appearances ===
1998: "Me & My Boo" Cam'ron – Confessions of Fire
1998: "Walk On By" Fat Joe – Don Cartagena
2000: "Blak is Blak" – Bamboozled soundtrack
2001: "Spending Time" – Christina Milian – Christina Milian
2002: "We Still Don't Give a Fuck", "No One Does It Better" – Irv Gotti Presents: The Inc.
2002: "I'm So Happy (Remix)" – Irv Gotti Presents: The Remixes
2002: "Last Temptation" Ja Rule – The Last Temptation
2007: "I Am" Mýa – Liberation


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Hope, Clover (2021). The Motherlode: 100+ Women Who Made Hip-Hop. Harry N. Abrams. ISBN 978-1-4197-4296-5.


== External links ==
Charli Baltimore on Instagram
Charli Baltimore discography at DiscogsLance Taylor (born on April 17, 1957), also known as Afrika Bambaataa (), is an American DJ, rapper, and producer from the South Bronx, New York. He is notable for releasing a series of genre-defining electro tracks in the 1980s that influenced the development of hip hop culture. Afrika Bambaataa is one of the originators of breakbeat DJing.Through his co-opting of the street gang the Black Spades into the music and culture-oriented Universal Zulu Nation, he has helped spread hip hop culture throughout the world.
In May 2016, Bambaataa left his position as head of the Universal Zulu Nation due to multiple allegations of child sexual abuse dating as far back as the 1970s.


== Early life ==
Born Lance Taylor to Jamaican and Barbadian immigrants, Bambaataa grew up in the Bronx River Projects, with an activist mother and uncle. As a child, he was exposed to the black liberation movement and witnessed debates between his mother and uncle regarding the conflicting ideologies in the movement. He was exposed to his mother's extensive and eclectic record collection. Gangs in the area became the law, clearing their turf of drug dealers, assisting with community health programs and both fighting and partying to keep members and turf.Bambaataa was a member of the Black Spades. He quickly rose to the position of "warlord" in one of the divisions. As warlord, it was his job to build ranks and expand the turf of the young Spades. He was not afraid to cross turfs to forge relationships with other gangs, and their members. As a result, the Spades became the biggest gang in the city in terms of both membership and turf.After Bambaataa won an essay contest that earned him a trip to Africa, his worldview shifted. He had seen the movie Zulu and was impressed with the solidarity exhibited by the Zulu in that film. During his trip to Africa, the communities he visited inspired him to create one in his own neighborhood. He changed his name to Afrika Bambaataa Aasim, adopting the name of the Zulu chief Bhambatha, who led an armed rebellion against unfair economic practices in early 20th-century South Africa. He told people that his name was Zulu for "affectionate leader". Bambaataa formed The "Bronx River Organization" as an alternative to the Black Spades.


== Career ==
Due to the oft nebulous timeline of hip-hop origins, there are conflicting accounts of when Bambaataa began hosting parties. Some suggest he began as early as 1970, predating noted "father of hip hop" Kool Herc, while others contend he began after Herc in 1976, in fact, attending and drawing inspiration from Kool Herc parties. He vowed to use hip-hop to draw angry kids out of gangs and form the Universal Zulu Nation.Robert Keith Wiggins, a.k.a. "Cowboy" of Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five, is credited with naming hip-hop. The term became a common phrase used by MCs as part of a scat-inspired style of rhyming.The term was first used in print to refer to the music by reporter Robert Flipping, Jr. in a February 1979 article in the New Pittsburgh Courier, and to refer to the culture in a January 1982 interview of Afrika Bambaataa by Michael Holman in the East Village Eye. The term gained further currency in September of that year in another Bambaataa interview in The Village Voice, by Steven Hager.
In 1982, Bambaataa and his followers – a group of dancers, artists, and DJs – went outside the United States on the first hip-hop tour. He saw that the hip hop tours would be the key to help expand hip hop and his Universal Zulu Nation. In addition it would help promote the values of hip hop that he believed are based on peace, unity, love, and having fun. He brought peace to the gangs; many artists and gang members say that "hip hop saved a lot of lives". His influence inspired many overseas artists like the French rapper MC Solaar.He was a popular DJ in The South Bronx rap scene and became known not only as Afrika Bambaataa but also as the "Master of Records". He established two rap crews: the Jazzy 5 including MCs Master Ice, Mr. Freeze, Master Bee, Master D.E.E, and AJ Les, and the second crew referred to as Soulsonic Force including Mr. Biggs, Pow Wow and Emcee G.L.O.B.E.In 1982, Bambaataa, who was inspired by Kraftwerk's futuristic electronic music, debuted at The Roxy a test cassette of EBN-OZN's ground breaking, 12-inch white rap/spoken word "AEIOU Sometimes Y". It was the first commercially released American single ever made on a computer, a Fairlight CMI, ushering in the era of music computer sampling. In that same year, Bambaataa and Soulsonic Force stopped performing with a live band, and began to use only technology. Bambaataa credited the pioneering Japanese electropop group Yellow Magic Orchestra, whose work he sampled, as an inspiration.He also borrowed a keyboard hook from German electronic pioneers Kraftwerk and was provided the electronic Roland TR-808 "beat-box" by producer Arthur Baker and synthesizer player John Robie. That resulted in "Planet Rock", which went to gold status and generated an entire school of "electro-boogie" rap and dance music. Bambaataa formed his own label to release the Time Zone Compilation. He created "turntablism" as its own subgenre and the ratification of "electronica" as an industry-certified trend in the late 1990s.


=== Birth of the Zulu Nation ===
In the late 1970s, Bambaataa formed what became known as the Universal Zulu Nation, a group of socially and politically aware rappers, B-boys, graffiti artists and other people involved in hip hop culture. By 1977, inspired by DJ Kool Herc and DJ Dee, and after Disco King Mario loaned him his first equipment, Bambaataa began organizing block parties all around The South Bronx. He even faced his long-time friend, Disco King Mario in a DJ battle. He then began performing at Adlai E. Stevenson High School and formed the Bronx River Organization, then later simply "The Organization".Bambaataa had deejayed with his own sound system at The Bronx River Houses' Community Center, with Mr. Biggs, Queen Kenya, and Cowboy, who accompanied him in performances in the community. Because of his prior status in the Black Spades, he already had an established Army party crowd drawn from former members of the gang. Hip hop culture was spreading through the streets via house parties, block parties, gym dances and mix tapes.About a year later Bambaataa reformed the group, calling it the Zulu Nation (inspired by his wide studies on African history at the time). Specifically, Bambaataa watched the 1964 film Zulu, which sparked the name for the group. Five b-boys (break dancers) joined him, whom he called the Zulu Kings, and later formed the Zulu Queens, and the Shaka Zulu Kings and Queens. As he continued deejaying, more DJs, rappers, b-boys, b-girls, graffiti writers, and artists followed him, and he took them under his wing and made them all members of his Zulu Nation.
He was also the founder of the Soulsonic Force, which originally consisted of approximately 20 Zulu Nation members: Mr. Biggs, Queen Kenya, DJ Cowboy Soulsonic Force (#2), Pow Wow, G.L.0.B.E. (creator of the "MC popping" rap style), DJ Jazzy Jay, Cosmic Force, Queen Lisa Lee, Prince Ikey C, Ice Ice (#1), Chubby Chub; Jazzy Five-DJ Jazzy Jay, Mr. Freeze, Master D.E.E., Kool DJ Red Alert, Sundance, Ice Ice (#2), Charlie Choo, Master Bee, Busy Bee Starski, Akbar (Lil Starski), and Raheim. The personnel for the Soulsonic Force were groups within groups with whom he would perform and make records.
In 1980, Bambaataa's groups made Death Mix, their first recording with Paul Winley Records. According to Bambaata, this was an unauthorized release. Winley recorded two versions of Soulsonic Force's landmark single, "Zulu Nation Throwdown", with authorization from the musicians. Disappointed with the results of the single, Bambaataa left the company. The arranger credit on these recordings is correctly attributed to Harlem Underground Band leader, Kevin Donovan. This led to the false assumption that Bambaataa's real name was Kevin Donovan, which was widely accepted by the hip hop community until recently, following sexual abuse allegations, when Bronx River residents spoke out and revealed in oral testimonies that Bambaataa's real name was in fact Lance Taylor.The Zulu Nation was the first hip-hop organization, with an official birth date of November 12, 1977. Bambaataa's plan with the Universal Zulu Nation was to build a movement out of the creativity of a new generation of outcast youths with an authentic, liberating worldview.


=== Recognition ===
In 1981, hip hop artist Fab Five Freddy was putting together music packages in the largely white downtown Manhattan new wave clubs, and invited Bambaataa to perform at one of them, the Mudd Club. It was the first time Bambaataa had performed before a predominantly white crowd. Attendance for his parties downtown became so large that he had to move to larger venues, first to the Ritz, in a show organized by hip hop pioneer, Michael Holman, with Malcolm McLaren's group Bow Wow Wow, then to the Peppermint Lounge, The Jefferson, Negril, Danceteria and the Roxy."Planet Rock", a popular single produced by Arthur Baker and the keyboardist John Robie, came out that June under the name Afrika Bambaataa and the Soulsonic Force. The song borrowed musical motifs from German electronic music, funk, and rock. Different elements and musical styles were used together. The song became an immediate hit and stormed the music charts worldwide. The song melded the main melody from Kraftwerk's "Trans-Europe Express" with electronic beats based on their track "Numbers" as well as portions from records by Babe Ruth and Captain Sky, thus creating a new style of music altogether, electro funk.
Afrika Bambaataa was booked on the first ever European hip hop tour presented by Europe One and Fnac France. Along with himself were rapper and graffiti artist Rammellzee, Zulu Nation DJ Grand Mixer DXT (formerly Grand Mixer D.St), B-boy and B-girl crews the Rock Steady Crew, and the Double Dutch Girls, as well as legendary graffiti artists Fab 5 Freddy, PHASE 2, Futura 2000, and Dondi.Bambaataa's second release around 1983 was "Looking for the Perfect Beat", then later, "Renegades of Funk", both with the same Soulsonic Force. He began working with producer Bill Laswell at Jean Karakos's Celluloid Records, where he developed and placed two groups on the label: Time Zone and Shango. Bambaataa recorded "Wildstyle" with Time Zone, and he recorded a collaboration with punk rocker John Lydon and Time Zone in 1984, titled "World Destruction". Shango's album, Shango Funk Theology, was released by the label in 1984.In 1984, Bambaataa and other hip hop celebrities appeared in the movie Beat Street. He also made a landmark recording with James Brown, titled "Unity". It was billed in music industry circles as "the Godfather of Soul meets the Godfather of Hip Hop".Around October 1985, Bambaataa and other music stars worked on the anti-apartheid album Sun City with Little Steven Van Zandt, Joey Ramone, Run–D.M.C., Lou Reed, U2, and others. During 1988, he recorded "Afrika Bambaataa and Family" for Capitol Records, titled The Light, featuring Nona Hendryx, UB40, Boy George, George Clinton, Bootsy Collins, and Yellowman. He had recorded a few other works with Family three years earlier, one titled "Funk You" in 1985, and the other titled "Beware (The Funk Is Everywhere)" in 1986. In 1986 he discovered an artist in Atlanta. (Through MC SHY D) by the name of Kenya Miler a.k.a. MC Harmony (Known producer now as Kenya Fame Flames Miller), that was later signed to Criminal Records and Arthur Baker.The group was Harmony and LG. The first single, 1987's "Dance To The Drums/No Joke", was produced by Bambaataa and Baker with musicians Keith LeBlanc and Doug Wimbish. Bambaataa was involved in the Stop the Violence Movement, and with other hip hop artists recorded "Self Destruction", a 12" single which hit number one on the Hot Rap Singles Chart in March 1989. The single went gold and raised $400,000 for the National Urban League to be used for community anti-violence education programs.In 1990, Bambaataa made Life magazine's "Most Important Americans of the 20th Century" issue. He was also involved in the anti-apartheid work "Hip Hop Artists Against Apartheid" for Warlock Records. He teamed with the Jungle Brothers to record the album Return to Planet Rock (The Second Coming).
Gee Street Records, Bambaataa and John Baker organized a concert at Wembley Stadium in London in 1990 for the African National Congress (ANC), in honor of Nelson Mandela's release from prison. The concert brought together performances by British and American rappers, and also introduced both Nelson and Winnie Mandela and the ANC to hip hop audiences. In relation to the event, the recording Ndodemnyama (Free South Africa) helped raise approximately $30,000 for the ANC.From the mid-1990s, Bambaataa returned to his electro roots. In 1998, he produced a remix of "Planet Rock" combining electro and house music elements, called "Planet Rock '98", which is regarded as an early example of the electro house genre. In 2000, Rage Against the Machine covered his song "Renegades of Funk" for their album, Renegades. The same year, he collaborated with Leftfield on the song "Afrika Shox", the first single from Leftfield's Rhythm and Stealth. "Afrika Shox" also appeared on the soundtrack to Vanilla Sky.
In 2004, he collaborated with WestBam, a group that was named after him, on the 2004 album Dark Matter Moving at the Speed of Light which also featured Gary Numan. In 2006, he was featured on the British singer Jamelia's album Walk with Me on a song called "Do Me Right", and on Mekon's album Some Thing Came Up, on the track "D-Funktional". He performed the lyrics on the track "Is There Anybody Out There" by the Bassheads. As an actor, he has played a variety of voice-over character roles on Kung Faux.
Bambaataa was a judge for the 6th annual Independent Music Awards to support independent artists' careers. On September 27, 2007, it was announced that Afrika Bambaataa was one of the nine nominees for the 2008 Rock and Roll Hall of Fame Inductions. On December 22, 2007, he made a surprise appearance performing at the First Annual Tribute Fit For the King of King Records, Mr. Dynamite James Brown in Covington, Kentucky.On August 14, 2012, Bambaataa was given a three-year appointment as a visiting scholar at Cornell University. The appointment was made in collaboration between Cornell University Library's Hip Hop Collection, the largest collection of historical hip hop music in North America, and the university's department of Music. His archives, including his vinyl collection, original audio and video recordings, manuscripts, books, and papers arrived at the Cornell University Hip Hop Collection in December 2013.


== Child sexual abuse allegations ==
In April 2016, Bronx political activist Ronald "Bee-Stinger" Savage accused Bambaataa of molesting him in 1980, when Savage was 15. Following Savage's allegations, three more men accused Bambaataa of sexual abuse. Bambaataa issued a statement to Rolling Stone denying the allegations. In early May 2016, the Universal Zulu Nation disassociated themselves from Bambaataa as part of an organizational restructuring that saw the group removing "all accused parties and those accused of covering up the current allegations of child molestation" from their current roles in the organization.On May 6 that year, Bambaataa left his position as head of The Zulu Nation. Then, a month later, The Universal Zulu Nation issued an open letter apologizing to the people alleging Bambaataa had sexually abused them while expressing responsibility for the organization's "poor response". The letter was signed by nearly three dozen members of the Zulu Nation, including leaders from as far as New Zealand.In October 2016, Vice published an investigative article titled "Afrika Bambaataa Allegedly Molested Young Men For Decades" and reported stories from the alleged victims and witnesses. The article stated the accusers "claim that these accounts of alleged abuse have been common knowledge in the Bronx River community and beyond since the early 1980s, including among many of Bambaataa's closest friends and Zulu soldiers." In a March 2021 interview, Melle Mel said "everyone knew" about the accusations, calling it "hip hop's best kept secret" but would not respond when asked if he knew specifically.No charges have been brought against Afrika Bambaataa to date. In October 2021 Bambaataa was sued by an anonymous man who alleged that between 1991 and 1995 Bambaataa engaged in repeated sexual abuse with him when he was a minor and also sex trafficked him to other adult men.


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===


=== Singles ===


== See also ==
Can't Stop, Won't Stop: A History of the Hip-Hop Generation


== References ==


== External links ==

Afrika Bambaataa biography at hiphop.sh
Afrika Bambaataa discography at MusicBrainz
Afrika Bambaataa at AllMusic
Afrika Bambaataa at IMDb
DJ Afrika Bambaataa Interview at NAMM Oral History Collection (November 12, 2012)
Afrika Bambaataa Interview at Elementality
Afrika Bambaataa at WhoSampled
Instagram
Afrika Bambaataa OfficialNathaniel De La Rosa (born March 17, 1985), known professionally as Bodega Bamz, is of Dominican/Puerto Rican descent rapper/actor from Spanish Harlem, New York. De La Rosa first attracted attention for his 2012 mixtape, Strictly 4 My P.A.P.I.Z, which featured ASAP Ferg, Joell Ortiz, A$ton Matthews, Tego Calderon and Flatbush Zombies. De La Rosa later collaborated with the Martinez Brothers and released an EP, Sunday Service (2014). In 2015, he released his debut album, Sidewalk Exec. In 2017, he was cast in the Showtime series SMILF.


== Career ==
The 2012 critically acclaimed mixtape release of Strictly 4 My P.A.P.I.Z, showcased Bodega Bamz artistry and solidified his place in the hip-hop community. Strictly 4 My P.A.P.I.Z. includes features from ASAP Ferg, Joell Ortiz, A$ton Matthews, and Flatbush Zombies. Bodega Bamz teamed up with The Martinez Brothers and released an EP, Sunday Service (2014). In 2015, Bodega Bamz released his debut album Sidewalk Exec. Bodega Bamz also showcased another one of his talents by making his acting debut in his own cult film The Streets Owe Me, Hell Train and most recently cast in the Showtime series, SMILF. As of March 2020, he had a guest-starring role on the second season FBI.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===
Sidewalk Exec (2015)
PAPI (2018)
Yamz Heard This (2020)


=== Mixtapes ===
The Rest is Noise (2009)
Loosies & Brewskies (2011)
Strictly 4 My P.A.P.I.Z. (2012)
Sunday Service (with The Martinez Brothers) (2014)
Menace Tan Society (with Tanboys) (2015)
All Eyez Off Me (2016)
Westside Highway Story (with Joell Ortiz and Nitty Scott as No Panty, prod. by Salaam Remi) (2016)
Bodega's Way (2019)


=== Guest appearances ===


== Filmography ==


=== Television ===


== References ==Azealia Amanda Banks ( ə-ZEE-lee-ə; born May 31, 1991) is an American rapper, singer and songwriter. Raised in the Harlem neighborhood of New York City, she began releasing music through Myspace in 2008 before being signed to XL Recordings at age 18. She subsequently signed with Interscope and Polydor Records before separating in 2013. Banks became an independent artist and started her own independent record label, Chaos & Glory Recordings. She is currently signed to Parlophone and Warner Records. 
Banks's song "212" has been listed as one of the best songs of 2011 and one of the defining songs of the decade by music publications, including Rolling Stone and Billboard. She has since released two mixtapes (Fantasea in 2012 and Slay-Z in 2016), a studio album (Broke with Expensive Taste in 2014), and two extended plays (1991 in 2012 and Icy Colors Change in 2018). In 2017, Banks had her film debut in the musical drama Love Beats Rhymes, portraying the lead character. Banks's works have garnered acclaim from critics, drawing on various sounds including house, rap, pop, electronic music, and avant-garde.
Throughout her career, Banks's social media presence and outspoken views, especially on U.S. politics and race, as well as disputes with other artists, have attracted significant controversy. Complex noted in 2014 that "she gets more attention for her public feuds than she does for her music".


== Life and career ==


=== Early life and career beginnings ===
Azealia Amanda Banks was born on May 31, 1991, in New York City's Manhattan borough; she was the youngest of three. Her single mother raised her and her two siblings in Harlem, after their father died of pancreatic cancer when she was two years old. Following her father's death, Banks says that her mother "became really abusive—physically and verbally. Like she would hit me and my sisters with baseball bats, bang our heads up against walls, and she would always tell me I was ugly. I remember once she threw out all the food in the fridge, just so we wouldn't have anything to eat." Due to escalating violence, Banks moved out of her mother's home at age 14 to live with her older sister.At a young age, Banks became interested in musical theater, dancing, acting, and singing. At 16, she starred in a production of the comedy-noir musical City of Angels, where she was found by an agent who sent her to auditions for TBS, Nickelodeon, and Law & Order, all without success. At this point Banks decided to end her pursuit of an acting career, citing the stiff competition and overall sense of nonfulfillment. Because of this lack of fulfillment, she began writing rap and R&B songs as a creative outlet. She never finished high school, instead choosing to follow her dream of becoming a recording artist.Under the moniker Miss Bank$, she released her debut recording, "Gimme a Chance" online on November 9, 2008. The recording was accompanied by the self-produced track "Seventeen", which sampled the Ladytron song of the same name. Banks sent both tracks to American DJ Diplo. Later that year, she signed a development deal with record label XL Recordings and began working with producer Richard Russell in London, leaving the label later that year due to conflicting ideas.


=== 2011–2012: 1991 and Fantasea ===

 After leaving XL Recordings, Banks dropped the 'Miss Bank$' moniker and formally became Azealia Banks, which preceded a move to Montreal. Using YouTube as a portal, she uploaded several demo tracks, including "L8R" and a cover of "Slow Hands" by Interpol. After her Canadian visa expired, Banks returned to New York, where she sold keychains at a Manhattan jazz club and danced at a Queens strip club to make ends meet. "That's when I was really depressed", Banks said. "I don't have a manager, I don't have a boyfriend, I don't have any friends, I don't have any money. Here I am working at the strip club, trying not to say the wrong thing and get into fights with these girls who don't give a shit."In September 2011, Banks released her debut single, "212", as a free digital download from her website. It was released officially on December 6, 2011, as the lead single from her EP 1991. The track attained moderate European chart success, peaking at #14 in the Netherlands, #12 in the United Kingdom and #7 in Ireland.
Though unsigned at the time, Banks began working with British producer Paul Epworth on a debut studio album. It was announced in December 2011 that she would feature on "Shady Love", a track on American band Scissor Sisters' fourth studio album, Magic Hour, though the feature was uncredited. An accompanying video was released in January 2012 following its radio premiere from Annie Mac (BBC Radio 1) on January 4, though the single's release was canceled for unconfirmed reasons. Banks released the track "NEEDSUMLUV (SXLND)" online on January 16, 2012, coinciding with what would have been the 33rd birthday of the late singer Aaliyah, who is sampled on the track. A week later saw the emergence of a second track, "Bambi", produced by Paul Epworth and selected as the soundtrack for a Thierry Mugler fashion show in Paris.In May 2012, Banks announced plans to release a mixtape—originally titled Fantastic—titled Fantasea. Preceding its release the tracks "Jumanji", "Aquababe", and "Nathan" (featuring rapper Styles P) were made available online. Fantasea was released via Banks's Twitter account on July 11, and was succeeded by the unveiling of her online radio project Kunt.FM the following week.Banks's first EP, 1991, was released in the UK on May 28 and in the US the next day. The 4-track EP, which includes 212, was not eligible for the UK Albums chart, but the title track charted at #79 on the UK Singles chart. It also reached #133 on the US 200, while reaching #17 on the US R&B/Hip-Hop chart, #12 on the US Rap chart, and headin' US Heat chart. In 2013, 1991 was certified gold by the Australian Recording Industry Association.Banks was scheduled to release her second single, "Esta Noche", from Fantasea, on September 25, 2012, but it was pulled the day of its release due to sampling disputes between Banks and its producer, Munchi. The next month, it was confirmed that Banks had worked with Lady Gaga on two tracks, "Ratchet" and "Red Flame", on Gaga's third studio album, Artpop (2013), but they did not make the final album cut, and have not been released. Banks also revealed that she collaborated with Kanye West on G.O.O.D. Music's compilation album Cruel Summer but that her contributions did not make the final cut. On December 31, 2012, Banks released "BBD", which ultimately appeared on her debut album, Broke with Expensive Taste.


=== 2013–2016: Broke with Expensive Taste and Slay-Z ===
Early in 2012, Banks revealed that her debut album would be called Broke with Expensive Taste, and said it would include contributions from musicians including Toko Yasuda, Theophilus London, Kevin Hussein, and Ariel Pink. She initially said the album's lead single would be a track titled "Miss Amor" and that it would be accompanied by a B-side, "Miss Camaraderie", both produced by Lone, but these plans changed: in January 2013 she announced that the first official single from the album would be "Yung Rapunxel", which was released in March 2013 on SoundCloud.In May 2013, Banks announced that the second single from Broke with Expensive Taste would be "ATM Jam", featuring Pharrell. On June 29, she debuted the song at the 2013 Glastonbury Festival, with New York City radio station Hot 97 premiering a clean, shortened version of the studio recording three days later. On July 11, the full studio version of "ATM Jam" was released on BBC Radio 1. Banks confirmed in November 2013 that "ATM Jam" would not appear on Broke with Expensive Taste due to negative fan feedback and personal disinterest regarding the song.
Banks announced in mid-July that after a long battle, she had parted ways with Universal Music Group. She reportedly has possession and the rights to the work she released with Interscope. On July 28, 2014, Banks released the official second single from Broke with Expensive Taste, titled "Heavy Metal and Reflective", on her own label, Azealia Banks Records.
Banks surprise-released Broke with Expensive Taste under Prospect Park on iTunes on November 7, 2014. The physical album was released on March 3, 2015. In 2015, Banks performed at the Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival and posed nude for the April issue of Playboy, shot by Ellen von Unwerth. In late 2015, Banks revealed that she was unable to release new music until March 2016, due to the separation from her label, Prospect Park, but as of February 2016 she was officially cleared of her contract and able to release new music.
In February 2016, Banks released the single, "The Big Big Beat", with its official video uploaded to Vevo in April. The song would serve as the lead single to Banks's second mixtape, Slay-Z, which was released on March 24, 2016. In July 2017, Slay-Z was reissued to iTunes, Spotify, and other online music stores under her independent record label, Chaos & Glory Recordings. The re-issue would include the Lunice collaboration, "Crown", which was released as the project's sole bonus track.


=== 2017–present: Icy Colors Change and upcoming projects ===

In early 2017, Banks launched her online store, CheapyXO. The site features artist merchandise from Banks as well as original skin care products. The site also includes "CheapyXO Radio" which links to a playlist curated by Banks herself. Banks would later relaunch the site in 2020 to include her podcast, Cheapy's Two Cents, as well as, "Botantica XO", which is composed of spiritual items.Banks announced that her next project will be Fantasea II: The Second Wave, a follow-up to 2012 mixtape Fantasea. On June 5, 2017, Banks released the song "Chi Chi" intended to be the lead single from Business & Pleasure, however, it was later demoted to a stand-alone single. On June 26, 2017, Banks released the promotional single, "Escapades", from the upcoming album Fantasea II: The Second Wave. After a yearlong hiatus from touring, Banks returned to New York City to embark on a North American tour with 20 dates across the U.S. and Canada. The tour began on October 4 in Chicago and concluded on October 31 in San Francisco. Banks also performed across Europe in a handful of shows during 2017.
It was announced in 2015 that Banks would make her acting debut as the main character in the RZA-directed musical drama film Coco (now known as Love Beats Rhymes). The film was officially released on December 1, 2017.
On January 31, 2018, Banks announced that she had signed a US$1 million record deal with Entertainment One. On March 9, 2018, she released "Movin' On Up" to iTunes and other streaming platforms as the second promotional single from Fantasea II: The Second Wave. The song was previously featured in the 2017 film Love Beats Rhymes which Banks starred in. In March 2018, she announced that the first official single from her forthcoming album would be "Anna Wintour". It was released on April 6, 2018, and the official music video for the single was released on May 24, 2018. On July 6, a second single, "Treasure Island", was released. In November, Banks announced on her Instagram account that she would release the Christmas-themed EP Icy Colors Change on December 7. A demo of the title track was released in December 2017. The project was released on December 19 after several delays, with a promotional single, "What Are You Doing New Year's Eve?", released on December 13. Another promotional single from Fantasea II: The Second Wave, "Playhouse", was released exclusively on SoundCloud on April 12, 2019. Banks first teased the track back in 2016 by playing the entire song on the live streaming app, Periscope.Banks separated from eOne Music in 2019. Consequently, she announced in May of that year that she had been working on a project called Yung Rapunxel: Pt. II. The title references Banks's debut single off Broke with Expensive Taste, "Yung Rapunxel". It was released through SoundCloud on September 11, 2019, before later being taken down.On December 16, 2019, Banks released the promotional singles "Count Contessa" and "Pyrex Princess" on various streaming platforms. "Pyrex Princess" is a song from Business & Pleasure, previously released on August 22, 2018, before being taken down. "Count Contessa" was previously published on SoundCloud in 2013. A music video for "Count Contessa", directed by Rony Alwin and shot in Bali, Indonesia, was previously released on December 8, 2015.Throughout the first quarter of 2020, Banks debuted her podcast Cheapy's Two Cents and released multiple promotional singles, including "Slow Hands", an Interpol cover previously uploaded in 2012, as well as "Salchichón" being produced by frequent collaborator Onyx. Additionally, Banks released multiple tracks exclusively on her SoundCloud, such as "Diamond Nova", which previously served as the B-side to her 2013 single "ATM Jam", featuring and produced by Pharrell, as well as the Spanglish single, "Nirvana".On June 9, 2020, Banks released the lead single from her as-yet-unreleased album Business & Pleasure titled "Black Madonna" featuring producer Lex Luger. On December 23, 2020, she released the promotional single "Mamma Mia" on all platforms, where it was previously released on her SoundCloud account since April 2020. Banks released the single "Six Flags" featuring Slim Dollars on January 7, 2021.
On July 7, 2021, Banks released the single "Fuck Him All Night". A perfume of the same name was launched months later. She also announced that she was under new management.Banks began teasing a track titled "New Bottega" in August 2022. On November 9, she announced that she had officially signed to Parlophone Records, under Warner Music Group. In January 2023, she posted an Instagram Story stating that she had left Parlophone and announced that she would instead release "New Bottega" independently. After several delays, "New Bottega" was released by the Australian dance music label Sweat It Out on March 10, 2023, as a collaboration between Australian house producer Torren Foot and Banks. But the following May, Banks said she had not authorized the release and criticized Torren Foot's rework of the song, which she called "a piss poor remix of [her] master track". She also criticized Sweat It Out for marketing "New Bottega" as a dance recording instead of a hip hop song.


== Artistry ==

Banks has said she admires American recording artists Beyoncé and Aaliyah, calling the former "the queen of everything. She's the most remarkable performer and musician. And this is just my humble opinion, but I just think she's better than everyone else making music right now." Banks is inspired by, and has drawn directly upon, black gay culture, such as the film Paris Is Burning, in her music.AllMusic characterizes Banks as "a stylish vocalist who combines hardcore hip-hop, indie pop, and dance music". Meanwhile, The Guardian's John Robinson considered Banks's style "an appealing blend of Missy Elliott and dance-pop". In regards to her musical style, Banks has frequently been noted for the use of profanity in many of her songs, particularly her reclamation of the word "cunt", examples including her debut single "212", in which she uses the word more than ten times, or other songs such as "Fierce", in which she refers to herself as the "cunt queen". Banks attributes this to her upbringing in Harlem, saying, "...I'm from Harlem. I went to art school; I grew up with the cunts. And that term doesn't come from me! People think I invented it, but I didn't. To be cunty is to be feminine and to be, like, aware of yourself. Nobody's fucking with that inner strength and delicateness. The cunts, the gay men, adore that. My friends would say, 'Oh you need to cunt it up! You're being too banjee.' Banjee means unrefined and rough. You need your cunts: they fix your hair for you and do your makeup. They give you confidence and give you life." She is also known for her often fast-paced rapping, or "flow". In a review of Banks's debut EP 1991, Chris Dart of Exclaim! found Banks's rapping speed "remarkable", commenting that she "manages a feat that takes most rappers the better part of a career to master: the perfect marriage of bangin', club-friendly beats and smart, crisply delivered lyrics".Since writing "212", Banks has adopted an alter ego, "Yung Rapunxel". This alter ego was adapted from Banks calling herself Rapunzel due to a long weave she wore while working at Starbucks as a teenager. Banks discussed this with Rolling Stone saying, "Yung Rapunxel is that girl who pisses people off but doesn't really mean to. She's actually a sweetheart! But people are so taken aback that she's so herself; she's not even trying to be unique or different. She literally just lives in her head; she does what she wants to do. So, the lipstick is here for someone who is happy to be themself."


== Personal life ==
In October 2019, Banks announced that she would perform under the name Azilka (Russian: Азилька) during her tour in the former Soviet Union.On August 8, 2020, Banks announced that she intended to end her life by euthanasia and document the process on film.In February 2021, Banks publicly announced her engagement to American artist Ryder Ripps. They made an audio sex tape and sold it using NFT, which was then up for resale for $260 million. In March, Banks announced the end of the relationship.


=== Health ===
In July 2016, Banks admitted to lightening her skin due to skin blemishes from her birth control and defended the process of skin bleaching. In December 2016, she revealed that she had had a miscarriage and asked her fans for advice and support.BuzzFeed News wrote Banks "has been frank about her own mental health issues". In 2020, during a plea deal in Manhattan Court to avoid prison time, she was ordered to seek mental health treatment. The British magazine gal-dem reported that she has bipolar disorder.


=== Sexuality and views on the LGBT community ===
Banks identifies as bisexual. During the few instances where she has discussed her sexuality with the press, she has expressed dissatisfaction with society's labeling of others based on sexual orientation. In an interview with The New York Times, she said, "I'm not trying to be, like, the bisexual, lesbian rapper. I don't live on other people's terms."Banks has been accused of both homophobia and transphobia, with Out editors calling her a bully to the LGBT community rather than an ally. In 2015, she used language that PinkNews called homophobic when she called a flight attendant a "fucking faggot" during what it described as an "in-flight meltdown". Later that month, Banks posted what Billboard called a "Twitter tirade" against the LGBT community when she tweeted, "LGBT community are like the gay white KKK's. Get some pink hoods and unicorns and rally down rodeo drive... If I am to be a part of an LGBT community I want to be in it with people who aren't so weak or so easily moved ya know." In 2020, she said gay men were "appropriating horse culture" by using harnesses, ketamine, and sexual lubricant. In 2021, she said trans women are "just gay boys on hormones using male aggression to force their ways into women's spaces." In 2023, she argued that state funding for other healthcare issues should take precedence over funding for gender-affirming surgery, which she compared to "cosmetic surgery".


=== Political views ===
Banks is known for publicly speaking out on African-American civil rights issues, with a commentator at Splice Today describing her as having "that hot New York temper where she will pop off if you cross her the wrong way". In December 2014, she called for over $100 trillion to be paid to African Americans as financial reparations for the enslavement of their ancestors, citing U.S. reparations to Native American communities and the German reparations to Jewish survivors of the Holocaust as precedents. On Twitter, she urged young African Americans to take an interest in such issues, adding, "We are the children of the people who perished in the name of modern capitalism and we deserve a piece of that fucking pie". She added that reparations could be used to improve educational prospects for black Americans.In 2016, Banks took to Twitter to express her endorsement of Donald Trump's 2016 presidential campaign, clarifying that "I have no hope for America ... I think Donald Trump is evil like America is evil and in order for America to keep up with itself it needs him ... politicians are inherently evil, I trust the one who is most transparent." She retracted her endorsement of Trump in October 2016, posting on Facebook: "I made a major mistake endorsing toupey-toupee. Women's rights are important and we must protect them." Nonetheless, after Trump won the presidency, she posted, "He is my fucking hero right now. I am elated."In April 2022, Banks posted an Instagram story repeatedly chastising Ukraine in the 2022 Russian invasion of the country. She claimed, unsubstantiated, that Ukraine's president Volodymyr Zelenskyy prevented African exchange students from leaving the country. She also claimed without evidence that Ukraine was using its embassies in African countries to recruit mercenaries to fight in Ukraine. Banks said that Zelenskyy was trying to provoke a global nuclear war and urged Ukraine to surrender. In a previous Instagram story from April 1, she had praised Russia's president Vladimir Putin, saying that she "really fucking love[s]" him and calling him her "favorite super villain ever".Banks moved from Los Angeles to Miami in 2021. In January 2023, she said she did so because she had become disillusioned with the politics of Los Angeles and that she felt "way safer" in Florida. She also praised Florida's governor Ron DeSantis, whom she called "focused on the basic shit" and "practical about a lot of things".


== Disputes and controversies ==
Banks has developed a reputation for disputes with several public figures on social media, particularly Twitter, with Complex noting that "she gets more attention for her public feuds than she does for her music".Banks has been involved in altercations with crew and passengers aboard commercial flights, resulting in her being removed from airliners, and she has accused some foreign airlines of racism against her. She also denounced "racists" in Israel and Australia and said she would never return to either country.In May 2016, Banks posted what several media outlets described as a racist and homophobic rant against Zayn Malik on Twitter, later targeting young actress Skai Jackson. As a result, Banks was dropped by her UK booking agency and an upcoming hip-hop festival, and her Twitter account was suspended. Later Twitter accounts were created then suspended, most recently in 2022.In December 2016, Banks posted a series of videos on Instagram detailing her cleanup of a closet in her apartment where she claims to have been practicing witchcraft. She admitted to practicing "three years worth of brujeria". The video appeared to show dried blood, feathers, and the carrion of dead chickens. In January 2021, she received criticism after posting a video on Instagram of her digging up and cooking her dead pet cat. She later said in an interview that she did not eat the cat and exhumed it for taxidermizing purposes.In January 2019, Banks posted xenophobic remarks about Irish people after performing in Ireland, in which she used ethnic slurs and mocked the Great Famine. That August, she posted xenophobic remarks about Swedish people after performing in Sweden, adding that she "would really love to see someone bomb the shit out of this place".


== Discography ==

Studio albums

Broke with Expensive Taste (2014)


== Filmography ==


== Tours ==
Headlining

Mermaid Ball (2012–13)
Broke with Expensive Taste Tour (2014–15)
Azealia Banks: North American Tour (2017)Featured act

ShockWaves NME Awards Tour (2012)


== Awards and nominations ==


== See also ==
LGBT culture in New York City
List of LGBT people from New York City


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Hope, Clover (2021). The Motherlode: 100+ Women Who Made Hip-Hop. Harry N. Abrams. ISBN 978-1-4197-4296-5.


== External links ==

Official website at the Wayback Machine (archived January 28, 2020)
Azealia Banks on Facebook
Azealia Banks at IMDb
Azealia Banks discography at DiscogsChristopher Charles Lloyd (born April 30, 1982), better known by his stage name Lloyd Banks, is an American rapper. He began his career as a member of East Coast hip hop group G-Unit, alongside childhood friends 50 Cent and Tony Yayo. After the group released their debut album Beg for Mercy (2003), Banks released his first solo album, The Hunger for More in 2004. The album was met with positive reviews and peaked at number one on the Billboard 200—making him the only G-Unit member besides 50 Cent to achieve this—and spawned the top ten hit single "On Fire". He followed up with his second and third albums, Rotten Apple (2006) and H.F.M. 2 (The Hunger For More 2) (2010).
In preparation for H.F.M. 2, Banks left Interscope Records prior to its release and signed with EMI the following year, as did his G-Unit cohorts.


== Early life ==
Christopher Lloyd was born in Baltimore, Maryland, and raised in the South Jamaica section of the Queens borough in New York City; he is of mixed Puerto Rican and African-American descent. His father spent most of Lloyd's childhood in prison, leaving his mother to raise him and his two siblings. Lloyd attended August Martin High School but dropped out at the age of 16. For his stage name, he took his great, great-grandfather's name Banks, which was passed on by his uncles who also shared it.


== Career ==


=== Beginnings with G-Unit (1999–2004) ===

G-Unit was founded when childhood friends Lloyd Banks, 50 Cent, and Tony Yayo decided to form a group. They met Young Buck when UTP group came to New York and  50 Cent heard Young Buck rapping. After 50 Cent signed his contract with Aftermath Entertainment they took Young Buck in the group and signed him.
Tony Yayo, being an older and more experienced rapper, joined 50 Cent on the Nas Promo Tour, the Cash Money Tour and the Ruff Ryders Tour. As Banks remained at home waiting for 50 and Yayo to return, he started rapping around the neighborhood to further increase his buzz on the streets. He then hooked up with neighborhood producers and recorded tracks for local mixtapes, becoming renowned on the mixtape scene. While Banks was recording Mixtapes, 50 Cent was soon granted his own record label by Dr. Dre and released the album Get Rich or Die Tryin'; Lloyd Banks was featured on the song "Don't Push Me", and the remixed version of "P.I.M.P". Soon after the group had established their own record label, G-Unit Records, G-Unit released their first official group album Beg for Mercy in November 2003, which went on to be certified double platinum.


==== Shooting ====
On September 10, 2001, Banks was shot twice while leaving a nightclub in Southside Jamaica, Queens.  He was hit in the back and stomach, and ran to the nearest hospital after suffering the injuries. He woke up the next morning to news of the 9/11 terrorist attacks and watched from his hospital bed as the Twin Towers fell to the ground.


==== Legal Issues ====
During August 2005, Lloyd Banks, Young Buck, and their entourage were traveling in a van, when the vehicle was pulled over after passing through a red light in midtown Manhattan. Officers said they discovered a loaded handgun and another weapon in the van. Prosecutors asked a judge to dismiss the charges after an investigation determined that neither Lloyd Banks nor Young Buck were in possession of the weapons. Felony gun charges against Lloyd Banks and Young Buck were dropped on November 8, 2006.In the early morning hours of January 9, 2010, in a Kitchener, Ontario hotel, an alleged altercation took place between Banks and a concert promoter over performance fees. Banks, and three of his associates, were later charged with forcible confinement, aggravated assault and robbery, and released on $50,000 bail.


==== Feud with The Game ====
The most well known feud involving Lloyd Banks is the feud between himself and The Game, which became public after The Game left G-Unit. Banks speculates that The Game was jealous about the attention Banks received after the success of his debut album The Hunger for More as well as Banks winning a lyricist title.


=== Solo career and The Hunger for More (2004–2005) ===

Lloyd Banks released his solo debut album The Hunger for More in June 2004. The first single was the summer smash hit "On Fire" which featured 50 Cent, however he was uncredited.
Banks explained the reasoning behind the album's title:

When I say The Hunger for More, it could be referring to more success. It could be more money. Or Respect. More power. More understanding. All those things lead up to that hunger for more, because my more isn't everybody else's more. I feel like I made it already, because I got already what everybody on the corners of the neighborhood I grew up in is striving to get.
The album was a commercial success, receiving positive reviews.  It debuted at number 1 on the Billboard charts with over 433,000 copies sold in the first week. The album has since sold over 1.5 million copies  and has been certified platinum by the RIAA.During an interview, Lloyd Banks commented on his first week sales:

That's the kind of debut that veteran artists have," says Banks. "That showed me that following 50's moves and studying the way that he played the game had put me in an incredible position.
Two other singles were also released from The Hunger For More, "I'm So Fly" and "Karma", the latter was a hit reaching number 17 on the Billboard Hot 100, number 9 on the R&B charts and number 6 on the rap charts. 
At the time of the album's release, Lloyd Banks was managed by Sha Money XL and Teamwork Music.


=== Rotten Apple (2006–2008) ===

The Big Withdrawal was originally intended to be Lloyd Banks' second album. The album was leaked to the internet after Banks had a ménage à trois encounter with two women and left the CD album behind. The leaked version of the album contained 23 tracks.
During an interview, Lloyd Banks commented on the issue, he said: It's truth to that rumor. That comes from me doing too much. I was just lost in my ways, fucked two women at one time. It's the little things you don't pay attention to. I had the CD in an actual DJ Whoo Kid mixtape cover. It was just a blank CD with just tracks. I got over 70, 80 tracks, so you can't get them all on one CD. So I might have had 14 tracks of the last two weeks or something like that. Next thing I know, [I] can't find the CD. I'm assuming it had to be from one of those situations when you got too much going on around you. Maybe I'mma just stick to one girl from now on. That's the only explanation that makes sense. Sticky fingers.
Due to the leak, Lloyd Banks began work on Rotten Apple. "Rotten Apple" is a play on New York City's nickname "The Big Apple". It was released on October 10, 2006. The album debuted at #3, selling 143,000 copies in its first week. Rotten Apple was not considered as a commercial success because his debut album sold a significantly higher number of copies in its first week. He has released three singles from Rotten Apple: "Hands Up", "The Cake", and "Help".


=== Departure from Interscope (2009) ===
Banks was dropped from Interscope Records in 2009. He is still signed to G-Unit Records, which will release his new album. Banks released a mixtape on his 27th birthday, which fell on April 30, 2009; it included the track "Officer Down" that dissed Rick Ross. Banks also released a mixtape in 2009 called V5.In 2010, a year later, Interscope Records reached back out to try to re-sign Lloyd Banks. Banks did not go for it and put his third album out under G-Unit Records.


=== The Hunger for More 2 and signing with EMI (2010–2013) ===

In late January 2010, it was announced that Banks would release a new song, "Beamer, Benz, or Bentley" featuring Juelz Santana, from his upcoming third studio album. "Beamer, Benz, or Bentley" charted at #49 on the Billboard Hot 100. In early June, Banks released the second single off the album, "Any Girl" featuring R&B singer Lloyd. Later on November 2, 2010, he released the third single Start It Up featuring Swizz Beatz, Kanye West, Ryan Leslie and Fabolous. Lloyd released the fourth single off the album, "I Don't Deserve You", featuring R&B singer Jeremih.
Banks release info via his Twitter announcing that the title for his third album has tentatively been called 'The Hunger for More 2' and will attempt to take him back to his best work. However, the G-Unit label later stated that the title is not set in concrete and still may be altered. The title of the album was confirmed by 50 Cent as The Hunger for More 2 in an interview with MTV News. According to Banks, Interscope is trying to get him back due to the success of the single "Beamer, Benz, or Bentley", but failed when Lloyd Banks revealed that he had signed a deal with EMI.
After being dropped by  Interscope Records in 2009, Lloyd Banks announced on Friday, August 13, 2010, on MTV News that EMI Label Services has signed a deal with 50 Cent's label, G-Unit Records, in which EMI will distribute and promote releases on the G-Unit roster in North America including Lloyd Banks third album H.F.M. 2 (Hunger for More 2). On October 18, 2011, Banks was featured on the remix of Queen's Rapper Trav's single "Ride The Wave" alongside Juelz Santana.
Banks' had this to say about the deal,It's refreshing to see the EMI staff excited about my project, they have the passion and energy I haven't seen in while.


=== Resurgence with G-Unit (2014–2018) ===
During a performance at BB King's in New York City on August 2, 2015, Banks addressed his long-awaited Cold Corner 3 mixtape and expressed disappointment at the current state of hip-hop. He explained that the project would be released commercially, and available for pre-order. However, if he's not satisfied with the pre-order numbers, it will not be released.


=== Departure from G-Unit and 50 Cent feud (2018–present) ===
Lloyd banks left G-Unit Records in June 2018 announced in an Instagram post by 50 Cent at the time it seemed as if the two were still friends as 50 would tell fans to check out Banks's new mixtape however it seems their relationship is no longer amicable. 50 Cent in an interview with Big Boy spoke about the different members of G-Unit and said "Banks, he just... I don't even know he couldn't even tell you like at any point when you speak to him where the problem is. I put him like where I put Marquise like they just have something internal going on with them that gives them some sort of resentment towards me and I just don't even care about whats going on". However Trav a former associate of G-Unit went on Instagram live and spoke on the matter "Banks father died bro and Banks was sad bro all Banks wanted to do was him to pull up like yo bro I'm sorry for your condolences because the ni**a 50 don't come from no family he tried to play like this fake role like man you ain't even know your father". 50 cent went on to call Lloyd banks Lazy in his book Hustle Harder, Hustle Smarter which Lloyd banks would seemingly respond to in his song Stranger Things. Lloyd banks hasn't spoke on the matter publicly however he has sent words that seem to be aimed at 50 cent on numerous songs including cold summer freestyle and Stranger Things. In-between Lloyd banks departure from G-Unit and June 2021 Lloyd banks remained relatively quiet other than introducing a clothing line and touring places such as Australia, Lloyd banks wasn't doing interviews or releasing any new projects other than some freestyles in fact Lloyd banks hadn't released a new project since his mixtape Halloween Havoc 3 in 2016. He would also go on to twitter to tweet things such as "Let's be real..ain't nobody checking for banks anymore" leaving fans wondering if Lloyd banks was done with music. However fans would be surprised as in April 2021 he would release a  post on Instagram that teased possible new music which continued on to May 25 were a video was released with a brief spoken-word monologue from poet Rashan Brown and on May 25 a tracklist and cover art was revealed. The album was released on June 4, 2021, as his 4th album and first album in 11 years named The Course of the Inevitable which sold 12,000 copies in its first week. The album received very positive reviews and Lloyd banks seemed happy with the reception as he spoke about more upcoming music at a concert he held in Sony Hall.


== Awards ==
In 2004, Banks was awarded 2004's Mixtape artist of the Year at the Mixtape Awards. Lloyd Banks commented on this award in an interview with AOL Sessions:

When I won the mixtape artist of the year 2004, after that I didn't want to get away from it because that right there is where I got my satisfaction, from the fans giving me that award. It wasn't like an award show when you got some big fat guys in suits on the podium that never even heard my album giving me a rating or judging what I deserve... that's actually my most proudest trophy right now.
In 2005, "On Fire" was nominated for a Grammy award for Best Rap Solo Performance.  In 2006, "Touch It [Remix]" was nominated for Hip-Hop Video of the Year, and won for Best Collaboration at the BET Awards.  The award was shared by Banks and his collaborators, Busta Rhymes, Mary J. Blige, Rah Digga, Missy Elliott, Papoose, and DMX. In 2010 with the excitement surrounding the release of H.F.M. 2 (Hunger for More 2) and his return to Hip-Hop's spotlight Hip-Hop news website HipHopDX wrote that Banks had the "Comeback of the Year".


== Discography ==

Studio albumsThe Hunger for More (2004)
Rotten Apple (2006)
H.F.M. 2 (The Hunger for More 2) (2010)
The Course of the Inevitable (2021)
The Course of the Inevitable 2 (2022)
The Course of the Inevitable III: Pieces of My Pain (2023)
Collaborative albumsBeg for Mercy (with G-Unit) (2003)
T·O·S (Terminate on Sight) (with G-Unit) (2008)


== Filmography ==


=== Television ===


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website
G-Unit UK
Lloyd Banks at AllMusic
Lloyd Banks at IMDbPaul Nathaniel Barman (born October 30, 1974), better known by his stage name MC Paul Barman, is an American rapper and illustrator. Having emerged during the early 2000s, Barman became a definitive voice within the realm of alternative hip hop, noted for his intricate rhyme schemes and humorous narrative style, which he infuses with an array of literary devices. He is particularly recognized for his usage of word games, including acrostics and palindromes, in crafting his rap lyrics. The SymmyS Awards, a competition once organized by The Palindromist, had Barman as a past panel judge. Barman's complex and multilayered approach to songwriting has earned him both acclaim and attention, marking him as a distinctive and influential figure within the alternative hip hop scene.


== Early life ==
Barman is from Ridgewood, New Jersey. He is Jewish. He attended Brown University.


== Career ==
MC Paul Barman released his debut EP, It's Very Stimulating, on Wordsound in 2000; it was produced by Prince Paul.His first studio album, Paullelujah!, was released on Coup d'État in 2002.He released his second studio album, Thought Balloon Mushroom Cloud, on Househusband in 2009.He has toured with Blackalicious. He has taught a hip hop class to high school kids at the Bank Street College of Education.In 2018, he released (((Echo Chamber))), his first studio album since 2009's Thought Balloon Mushroom Cloud, on Mello Music Group. It included productions from MF Doom, Questlove, and Mark Ronson, as well as guest appearances from Open Mike Eagle and Masta Ace.


== Musical style and influences ==
The New York Times called his music "a surreal departure from the rap norm". His music has been influenced by Boogie Down Productions, Jungle Brothers, Wu-Tang Clan, MC Lyte, and De La Soul.


== Discography ==
Studio albums

Paullelujah! (Coup d'État, 2002)
Thought Balloon Mushroom Cloud (Househusband, 2009)
(((Echo Chamber))) (Mello Music Group, 2018)Collaborative albums

A Year of Octobers (2021) (as YOUNGMAN with Celestaphone)Mixtapes

Full Buck Moon Kaboom (Househusband, 2008)
Blue Moon Kaboom (Househusband, 2017)EPs

It's Very Stimulating (Wordsound, 2000)Singles

"Postgraduate Work" (Househusband, 1998)
"How Hard Is That?" (Matador, 2000)
"Cock Mobster" (Coup d'État, 2001)
"Father Moose" (Househusband, 2009)
"Decide-A-Tron" (Househusband, 2017)
"Happy Holidays" (Mello Music Group/Househusband, 2017)
"Leapfrog" (Mello Music Group, 2018)Guest appearances

Deltron 3030 - "Meet Cleofis Randolph the Patriarch" from Deltron 3030 (2000)
MF Doom - "Hot Guacamole" from MM..LeftOvers (2004)
Mr. Dead - "Chemically Imbalanced" from Metabolics Volume II: Dawn of the Dead (2001)
Masta Ace - "Roommates Meet" and "The Classes" from Disposable Arts (2001)
DJ Yoda - "Salvation Barmy" from How to Cut and Paste Mix Tape Vol.1 (2001)
Le Hammond Inferno - "Man from Lafonda (Paul Barman Remix)" from This Is Bungalow (2004)
Prince Paul - "Inside Your Mind" and "The Night My Girlfriend Left Me" from Itstrumental (2005)
DJ Yoda - "Salaam" from The Amazing Adventures of DJ Yoda (2006)
Rushden & Diamonds - "We Want Rushden" and "Money" from 2010 (2010)
Open Mike Eagle - "Exiled from the Getalong Gang" from Rappers Will Die of Natural Causes (2011)
Open Mike Eagle - "Starz" from 4nml Hsptl (2012)
Memory Man - "Live from Death Row" from Broadcast One (2015)
Open Mike Eagle - "Trickeration" from A Special Episode of (2015)
L'Orange and Kool Keith - "Suspended Animation" from Time? Astonishing! (2015)
Prince Paul - "Girls Wanna Do Me, Guys Wanna Be My Friend" from The Redux (2017)
Donwill - "Don, Rob, and Paul" from One Word No Space (2019)
Celestaphone - "Babies" from Paper Cut From the Obit (2023)


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website 
MC Paul Barman discography at Discogs
Paul Barman at IMDbMark Batson is an American producer, musician and songwriter. He has worked on albums by artists including Alicia Keys, Dave Matthews Band, LeAnn Rimes, Anthony Hamilton, Eminem, India Arie, 50 Cent, Jay-Z, Maroon 5, Skylar Grey, Grace Potter and the Nocturnals, Seal, Nas, and Sting.  He has also composed music for films and television shows including I, Tonya, American Hustle, Sharp Objects,  Spider-Man 2 and  Power Book IV: Force.


== Early life and career ==
Batson was formally trained in classical piano as a child growing up in the Bushwick Houses in Brooklyn, New York. He performed classical piano pieces at Carnegie Hall and Brooklyn Academy of Music at the ages of 12. He later studied jazz piano at Howard University. He was the pianist for the Smithsonian Institution's African American Culture department. He first mixed hip hop sampling and drum programming with live instrumentation as part of the group Get Set V.O.P. This blend is characteristic of much of his later production work.


== Career ==
Batson has composed music for the feature films Beauty Shop, Miami Vice, American Hustle. and Triple 9. He is also the writer of the graphic novel series Loaded, and is developing the music for the series with Dr. Dre.


== Awards ==
Batson won Grammy Awards in 2010 and 2011 for Best Rap Album For Eminem's Relapse (2010) and Recovery (2011). He also won the Grammy for Best R&B album in 2004 for Beyoncé's Dangerously in Love.  In 2016, he produced albums for Alicia Keys, Skylar Grey, LeAnn Rimes and Anthony Hamilton.


== Discography ==


=== Production and songwriting ===


==== Albums ====
Alicia Keys - "As I Am"  (Producer, Writer, Musician)
Alicia Keys -  "Here" (Producer, Writer, Musician)
Anthony Hamilton - "What I'm Feelin'"  (Producer, Writer, Musician)
Anthony Hamilton - "Comin' from Where I'm From (Producer, Writer, Musician)
Dave Matthews Band - Stand Up (Producer, Writer, Musician, String Arranger, Conductor)
Dave Matthews Band - Come Tomorrow (Producer, Writer, Musician)
Dave Matthews Band - The Batson Sessions (unreleased) (Producer, Writer, Musician)
Eminem - Relapse (Producer, Writer, Musician)
Eminem - Relapse: Refill (Producer, Writer, Musician)
Grace Potter and the Nocturnals - Grace Potter and the Nocturnals (Producer, Writer, Musician)
Seal - Seal IV (Co-Producer, Writer, Musician, Piano/Horn/String Arrangements)
Sekou Sundiata - Longstoryshort (Producer, Writer, Musician)
India Arie - "Acoustic Soul"  (Producer, Writer, Musician)
Lianne La Havas - "Blood" (Producer, Writer, Musician)
Skylar Grey - "Natural Causes" (Producer)
LeAnn Rimes - "Remnants" (Producer, Writer, Musician)
Mark Batson - "I Want To See You Shining" (Producer, Writer, Musician, Artist as King Batson)


==== Songs ====
Main: List of songs written or co-written by Batson"1963" Rachael Yamagata (Writer, Musician)
"1973" James Blunt (Writer)
"28 Thousand Days" Alicia Keys (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"3 A.M." Eminem (Writer, Musician)
"30 Something" Jay-Z (Writer, Musician)
"A-500" Mark Batson and Klaus Badelt (Producer, Composer, Musician)
"Against All Odds" Godfather of Harlem feat Sean Cross (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Água Também É Mar" Marisa Monte (Musician)
"Ain't No Shame" Anthony Hamilton (Producer, Writer)
"About Me" Raekwon feat Busta Rhymes (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"American Baby" Dave Matthews Band (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"American Baby Intro" Dave Matthews Band (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Angels" Robert Randolph and the Family Band (Producer, Writer)
"Ass Like That" Eminem (Writer, Musician)
"Bagpipes From Baghdad" Eminem (Writer, Musician)
"Beach of the War Goddess" Caron Wheeler (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Better Days" Joe (String Arranger, Conductor)
"Big Weenie" Eminem (Writer, Musician)
"Blended Family (What You Do for Love)" Alicia Keys feat A$AP Rocky (Producer)
"Born to Lose" Empire Cast feat Sean Cross, Jussie Smollett, Swizz Beatz, and Yazz
"Bring Me to Life" MK feat Milly Pye (Writer, Musician)
"Brown Skin" India Arie (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Buffalo Bill" Eminem (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Butterflies" Raheem DeVaughn (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Butterfly" india.arie (Producer, Musician)
"Campaign Speech" Eminem (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Can't Let Go" Anthony Hamilton (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Can't Stop" Dave Matthews Band (Producer, Writer)
"Catalina" Raekwon feat Lyfe Jennings (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Charlene" Anthony Hamilton (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Cocaina" Busta Rhymes (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Cold, Cold World" Carl Thomas (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Colors" Grace Potter and the Nocturnals (Producer, String Arranger, Conductor)
"Come & Go" 50 Cent feat Dr. Dre (Writer, Musician)
"Come On, Come On" Dave Matthews Band (Producer, Writer)
"Come Tomorrow" Dave Matthews Band (Producer, Writer)
"Comin' from Where I'm From" Anthony Hamilton (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Compliments of Mr. Chang" Mark Batson (Artist, Producer, Composer, Musician)
"Cornbread" Dave Matthews Band (Writer, Musician)
"Crack a Bottle" Eminem feat Dr. Dre and 50 Cent (Writer, Musician)
"Daddy" Beyoncé (Producer, Writer, Musician, Arranger, Conductor)
"Dang Dang" LeAnn Rimes (Producer, Writer)
"Death to My Enemies" 50 Cent (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Déjà Vu" Eminem (Writer, Musician)
"Diane" Robert Randolph and the Family Band (Producer, Writer)
"Don't Make Me Wait" Seal (Writer, Piano Arrangement, String Arrangement)
"Dope On A Rope" Miami Vice (Composer)
"Dreamgirl" Dave Matthews Band (Producer, Writer, Musician, String Arranger, Conductor)
"Drop The Bomb On 'Em" Eminem (Writer, Musician)
"Encore" Eminem (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Ever Seen Heaven" Anthony Hamilton (Producer, Writer)
"Everybody Wake Up (Our Finest Hour Arrives)" Dave Matthews Band (Producer, Writer, Musician, String Arranger, Conductor)
"Evil Deeds" Eminem (Writer, Musician)
"Fallin' in Love" Anthony Hamilton (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Father" Caron Wheeler (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Fire" 50 Cent feat Young Buck and Nicole Scherzinger (Writer, Musician)
"Forever One Flesh" Lathun (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Gentileza" Marisa Monte (Musician)
"Get It Together" Seal (Co-Producer, Writer, Musician, Horn Arrangements, String Arrangements)
"Get It Together (Reprise)" Seal (Co-Producer, Writer, Musician, Horn Arrangements, String Arrangements)
"Get You Some" Busta Rhymes (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Girl Can't Be Herself" Alicia Keys (Producer, Writer)
"Go Ahead" Alicia Keys (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Grateful" Anthony Hamilton (Producer, Writer)
"Grow" Lianne La Havas (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Happy Town" Tank and the Bangas (Producer, Writer)
"Happy Xmas (War Is Over)" by Maroon 5 (Producer, Arranger, Conductor)
"Hard To Breathe" Anthony Hamilton (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Heartbreak" Yelawolf (Additional Production, Writer, Musician)
"Hell Breaks Loose" Eminem (Producer, Musician)
"Hello" Eminem (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Hello Again" Dave Matthews Band (Producer)
"Higher" The Game (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Hold Down The Block" Nas (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Hot Summer Night" Grace Potter and the Nocturnals (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"How to Kiss a Boy" LeAnn Rimes (Producer)
"Humbled" LeAnn Rimes (Producer)
"Hunger For The Great Light" Dave Matthews Band (Producer, Writer, Musician, String Arranger, Conductor)
"I Choose" India Arie (Writer)
"I Couldn't Do That to Me" LeAnn Rimes (Producer)
"I Do, Didn't I" Lathun (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"I Don't Get High" Tank and the Bangas (Producer, Writer)
"I Get It In" 50 Cent (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"I Luv" Alicia Keys (Producer, Writer)
"I Need You" Alicia Keys (Producer, Writer, Musician, Horn Arranger)
"I Understand" Joe (String Arranger, Conductor)
"I Want You" Anthony Hamilton (Producer, Writer)
"I'm Waiting" Sharissa (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Idea of You" Dave Matthews Band (Producer, Writer)
"Illusion of Bliss" Alicia Keys (Producer, Writer)
"Imagine" Snoop Dogg feat Dr. Dre and D'Angelo (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Indigo" Kandace Springs (Writer)
"Insane" Eminem (Writer, Musician)
"Intro" Chika (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Jason" Jadakiss feat Swizz Beatz (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Just Lose It" Eminem (Writer, Musician)
"Jump" Skylar Grey (Producer, Writer)
"Kill for You" Skylar Grey feat Eminem (Producer, Writer)
"Knocked Up, Locked Down" Sandra St. Victor (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Let Me Roll" Seal (Co-Producer, Writer, Musician, Drum Programming)
"Let's Stay Home Tonight" Joe (String Arranger, Conductor)
"Lite As a Feather" Caron Wheeler (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Loneliest Star" Seal (Musician)
"Lost One" Jay-Z feat Chrisette Michele (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Louisiana Bayou" Dave Matthews Band (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Long Live Love" LeAnn Rimes (Producer, Writer)
"Love Intro" Miami Vice (Composer)
"Love Is an Angry Thing" Anthony Hamilton (Producer, Writer)
"Love Is Love Is Love" LeAnn Rimes (Producer)
"Love Is The Only Way" Robert Randolph and the Family Band feat Dave Matthews Band, Leroi Moore and Rashawn Ross (Producer, Writer)
"Love Line" LeAnn Rimes (Producer)
"Love Won't Let Me" Lathun (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Love's Divine" Seal (Co-Producer, Writer, Musician, Drum Programming, Horn Arrangements, String Arrangements)
"Low Road" Grace Potter and the Nocturnals (Producer, Writer)
"Medicine" Grace Potter and the Nocturnals (Producer)
"Medicine Ball" Eminem (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Megadeth" French Montana feat Remy Ma, Jadakiss and Swizz Beatz (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Minority Report" Jay-Z (Writer, Musician)
"Mother" LeAnn Rimes (Producer, Writer)
"Money" Grace Potter and the Nocturnals (Producer, Drum machine)
"More Than We Know" Alicia Keys (Producer, Writer)
"Mosh" Eminem (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Moving Mountains" Skylar Grey (Producer, Writer)
"M.P.A." Pusha T feat Kanye West, A$AP Rocky, and The-Dream (Writer, Musician)
"Music Box" Eminem (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Must Be The Ganja" Eminem (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"My Enemies" 50 Cent (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"My Mom" Eminem (Writer, Musician)
"Não É Fácil" Marisa Monte (Musician)
"Não Vá Embora" Marisa Monte (Musician)
"Nature" India Arie (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Never Get Enough" Lianne La Havas (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Never Letting Go" Anthony Hamilton (Producer, Writer)
"No Manners" Teyana Taylor (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"No More Playing Games" Jimmy Cozier (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Nowhere Fast" Eminem feat Kehlani (Writer)
"O Que Me Importa" Marisa Monte (Musician)
"Oasis" Grace Potter and the Nocturnals (Producer, Writer)
"Ok, You're Right" 50 Cent (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Old Dirt Hill (Bring That Beat Back)" Dave Matthews Band (Producer, Writer, Musician, String Arranger, Conductor)
"Old Time's Sake" Eminem feat Dr. Dre (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"On My Way" Chika (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"One of These Mornings" Moby feat Patti LaBelle (Producer, Musician)
"Only Love" Grace Potter and the Nocturnals (Producer, Writer)
"Open Your Eyes" Bonnie McKee (Writer)
"Out of My Hands" Dave Matthews Band (Producer, Writer)
"Outta Control (Remix)" 50 Cent feat Mobb Deep (Writer, Musician)
"Outrageous Love" LeAnn Rimes (Producer)
"Paris (Ooh La La)" Grace Potter and the Nocturnals (Producer)
"Part of My Life" India Arie (Producer, Musician)
"Pawn It All" Alicia Keys (Producer, Writer)
"Premonition (Intro)" Eminem (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Psycho" 50 Cent feat Eminem (Writer, Musician)
"Rain Man" Eminem (Writer, Musician)
"Remnants" LeAnn Rimes (Producer, Writer)
"Rich Girl" Gwen Stefani (Writer, Musician)
"Rich Girls" Raheem DeVaughn feat Too $hort (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Ridaz" Eminem (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Rocket Love" Black Coffey (Producer, Musician, Horn Arranger)
"Same Song & Dance" Eminem (Writer, Musician)
"Saturday Dancing" Melissa Etheridge (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Save Me" Anthony Hamilton (Producer, Writer)
"Share a Little Road" Anthony Hamilton (Producer, Writer)
"Simple" India Arie (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Since I Seen't You" Anthony Hamilton (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Sista Big Bones" Anthony Hamilton (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Smoke" 50 Cent feat Trey Songz (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Smooth Rider" Dave Matthews Band (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"So Bad" Eminem (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Soul Brothers" Melissa Etheridge (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Soul Street" Caron Wheeler (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Soul's On Fire" Anthony Hamilton (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Southern Stuff" Anthony Hamilton (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Spaceships" Tank and the Bangas (Producer, Writer)
"Stand Up (For It)" Dave Matthews Band (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Stay Wide Awake" Eminem (Writer, Musician)
"Steady as We Go" Dave Matthews Band (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Still" Anthony Hamilton (Producer, Writer)
"Stolen Away on 55th and 3rd" Dave Matthews (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Stolen Car (Take Me Dancing) [Batson-Doc-Will.I.Am Remix]" Sting feat will.i.am (Producer, Musician, Programmer)
"Strength, Courage & Wisdom" india.arie (Producer, Musician)
"Sunday Morning (Urban Remix)" Maroon 5 (Producer, Programmer, Musician)
"Superwoman" Alicia Keys (Musician)
"Sweetest Thing" Lathun (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Taking My Ball" Eminem (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Talk About Me" 50 Cent (Writer, Musician)
"Tearing Me Apart" Ry Cuming (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Tell Me What We're Gonna Do Now" Joss Stone feat Common (Writer)
"Tema De Amor" Marisa Monte (Musician)
"Testify" Nas (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"That Phone" Grace Potter and the Nocturnals (Producer, Writer, Piano)
"The Day We Met" Anthony Hamilton (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"The Gettin' (Instrumental)" Arrested Development (Writer, Musical Director)
"The Gospel" Alicia Keys (Producer)
"The News" Anthony Hamilton (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"The Set Up / Mr. Chang Sends Regards" Mark Batson (Artist, Producer, Composer, Musician)
"These Eyes" India Arie (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"This Too Shall Pass (Hidden Track)" India Arie (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Tiny Light" Grace Potter and the Nocturnals (Producer, Writer, Piano)
"Touch" Seal (Co-Producer, Writer, Musician, Drum Programming)
"Trainwreck" Willie Jones (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Trouble" Jay-Z (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Try Again" Raheem DeVaughn (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"U Ain't Goin' Nowhere" Young Buck feat Latoiya Williams (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Underground" Eminem (Writer, Musician)
"Untouchable" Eminem (Producer, Writer)
"Waiting for You" Seal (Co-Producer, Writer, Musician, Drum Programming, Horn Arrangements, String Arrangements)
"Walk in My Shoes" Anthony Hamilton (Producer, Writer)
"We Are Here" Alicia Keys (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"We Made You" Eminem (Writer, Musician)
"What I'm Feelin" Anthony Hamilton (Producer, Writer)
"When I'm Weary" Dave Matthews Band (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"When Love Come In" Lathun feat India Arie (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Where Did It Go Wrong" Anthony Hamilton (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"Where Do We Begin Now" Alicia Keys (Producer, Writer)
"Where Do We Go from Here" Alicia Keys (Musician, Horn Arranger)
"Where There's Gold" Seal (Co-Producer, Writer, Musician)
"White Rabbit" Grace Potter and the Nocturnals (Producer)
"White Rabbit" Mayssa Karaa (Producer, Arranger, Lyric Adaptor)
"Woman" Maroon 5 (Producer, Arranger, Conductor)
"Wonderful" India Arie (Producer, Writer, Musician)
"You Might Die Trying" Dave Matthews Band (Producer, Writer, Musician)


=== Score composer ===
Battlegrounds: Ball or Fall (2003)
Afro-Arabian Nights (2010)
Incorruptible (2015)
The Tale of Four (2016)
Dude (2018)
Power Book IV: Force (2022-)


== See also ==
List of record producers


== References ==


== External links ==
Aftermath Entertainment
Mark Batson at IMDbAnthony Joseph Tucker, better known as The Beat Bully or Tone Beats, is an American record producer and songwriter from Chester, Pennsylvania. His older brother Orlando Tucker, is also a notable record producer under the name, Jahlil Beats. He is also a member of the production team Da Night Rydas. The Beat Bully has produced for rappers such as Meek Mill, French Montana, Rick Ross, DJ Khaled, Bow Wow, and The Game among others. He is best known for producing Rick Ross' "Stay Schemin'" and Meek Mill's "House Party".


== Musical career ==
The Beat Bully first begun producing at the age of 13, along with his brother Jahlil Beats. He originally went by the production alias Tone Beats, but he changed it to The Beat Bully. He told XXL, "people used to just say I bullied the beats, so I put Beat Bully together." The Beat Bully begun taking production seriously in 2009, and he was then connected with rapper Meek Mill through Jahlil Beats. He then produced "I Want It All", a Lou Williams and Meek Mill song that was his first professionally recorded song. Then the second song he produced for Mill would be "House Party" "House Party" would peak at number 45 on the US Billboard Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart. He would end up producing three tracks on Meek Mill's breakout mixtape Dreamchasers. Shortly after he formed the production team Da Night Rydas with Kenoe, The Beat Bully, Snizzy, and Crack Coke. The team has since produced for 2 Chainz, T.I., Nicki Minaj and Lil Wayne.His second major production placement would be on Rick Ross' "Stay Schemin'", which features French Montana and Drake. He originally gave the beat to Bow Wow, but The Beat Bully would then pass it on to Rick Ross. In early 2012, The Beat Bully begun being managed by Young Money Entertainment president Mack Maine. On July 11, 2012, Birdman announced that he had signed The Beat Bully to Cash Money Records as a producer. Over 2012, The Beat Bully produced Rick Ross' "So Sophisticated" the second single from God Forgives, I Don't, and contributed production to DJ Khaled's Kiss The Ring and Meek Mill's debut album Dreams & Nightmares. In 2013, The Beat Bully produced the promotional singles "Fuck What Happens Tonight" by French Montana and "I Feel Like Pac, I Feel Like Biggie" by DJ Khaled.


== Production style ==
The Beat Bully's production style has been described as "sample-free club meets trap" music.


== Production discography ==


=== Singles produced ===


=== 2011 ===


==== Meek Mill - Dreamchasers ====
09. "Middle Of Da Summer" (featuring Mel Love)
12. "I'm Me"


=== 2012 ===


==== Meek Mill - Dreamchasers 2 ====
01. "Intro"
17. "House Party" Remix (featuring Fabolous, Wale, Mac Miller)


==== The Game - California Republic ====
01. "God Speed"
09. "Tonight"


==== Maybach Music Group - Self Made Vol. 2 ====
09. "M.I.A." (Omarion featuring Wale)


==== DJ Khaled - Kiss The Ring ====
08. "I Did It For My Dawgz" (featuring Rick Ross, Meek Mill, French Montana, Jadakiss)


==== Meek Mill - Dreams & Nightmares ====
01. "Dreams & Nightmares"


=== 2013 ===


==== Bow Wow - Greenlight 5 ====
05. "Eat The Cake" (featuring Lil Wayne)
11. "I Try"


==== French Montana - Excuse My French ====
06. "Fuck What Happens Tonight" (featuring DJ Khaled, Mavado, Ace Hood, Snoop Dogg and Scarface)


==== Meek Mill - Dreamchasers 3 ====
08. "Hip Hop"
11. "Heaven or Hell" (featuring Jadakiss and Guordan Banks)


==== DJ Khaled - Suffering from Success ====
03. "I Feel Like Pac/I Feel Like Biggie" (featuring Diddy, Meek Mill, T.I., Swizz Beatz and Rick Ross)


==== Ace Hood - Starvation 2 ====
08. "Want 4 Nothing"


=== 2014 ===


==== Ace Hood - Starvation III ====
04.  "Jamaica"


==== Wiz Khalifa - Blacc Hollywood ====
16. "On Me" (featuring Jeezy)


==== T.I. - Paperwork ====
08. "Jet Fuel" (featuring Boosie Badazz) (co-produced with Kenoe)


=== 2015 ===


==== DJ Khaled - I Changed a Lot ====
01. "I Don't Play About My Paper" (featuring Future and Rick Ross)
09. "I Ain't Worried" (featuring Ace Hood and Rick Ross)


=== 2016 ===


==== Drake - "Views" ====
05. "Hype" (produced with Boi-1da & Nineteen85)DJ Khaled - Major Key

06. "Ima Be Alright" (featuring Bryson Tiller and Future)


== References ==Orlando Jahlil Tucker (born February 8, 1988), better known by his stage name Jahlil Beats, is an American hip hop producer. He is currently signed to Jay Z's Roc Nation. He has produced for artists such as Puff Daddy, Lil Wayne, Fabolous, Meek Mill, Chris Brown, Tyga, Rick Ross, Ace Hood, Bobby Shmurda, T.I., and 50 Cent among others.He is best known for producing Meek Mill's "Ima Boss" and "Burn", and Lloyd Banks' "Jackpot", which was more famously used by Bobby Shmurda's  "Hot Nigga".


== Early life ==
Jahlil Beats was born in Chester, Pennsylvania. At the age of 12, he started learning audio engineering concepts, and building a passion for music under the guidance of his father (who was in a band) and cousin. By age fifteen he taught his brother, Anthony Tucker The Beat Bully how to produce music and they began making beats together. In high school they would give their beats out to friends to rap over. Jahlil would then go on to college before losing his financial aid and having to drop out.


== Musical career ==
After dropping out of college in 2008, Jahlil Beats returned to his city where he would meet upcoming rapper Meek Mill. Shortly after meeting, they collaborated with each other frequently. It is at that point, that Jahlil says was when he started taking music seriously. He first became notable after producing several tracks with Haydock Beats for Tyga and Chris Brown's collaboration mixtape Fan of a Fan, including "Holla at Me". He then would get what he considers his first big beat placement, which would be "Tonight" off Fabolous' EP There Is No Competition 2: The Grieving Music EP.In 2011, Jahlil Beats produced Meek Mill's breakout hit "Ima Boss". His production for that song, would later be named the tenth-best instrumental between 2008 and 2013 by Complex. Later that year following a six-label bidding war, on October 16 he signed a publishing deal with Jay-Z's Roc Nation, who also manages Meek Mill. In the following months he collaborated on songs artists such as Jay-Z, 50 Cent, Rihanna, J. Cole, Busta Rhymes, Meek Mill, Nelly, Big Sean, T.I., Jim Jones, Bow Wow, Willow Smith, and French Montana for their respective forthcoming albums. He would also start to closely work under No ID after signing to Roc Nation. He was even one of the first people to confirm working on Jay-Z's twelfth studio album. On July 20, 2012, he released a six-track free EP titled Legend Music.On November 6, 2012, he released an instrumental mixtape titled Legends Era. On December 25, 2012, he released an instrumental mixtape titled Crack Music 6. He followed that with Legends Era II on April 16, 2013. The second installment of Legends Era featured vocal guest appearances by Busta Rhymes, French Montana, Young Jeezy, Kid Ink, Juelz Santana, Lil Wayne, Game, Big Sean, Problem, Styles P, Vado, Ace Hood, and Meek Mill among others. On August 1 he was scheduled to release his second instrumental mixtape of the year Genius, however its release would be pushed back until September 10, 2013. It was met with positive reviews by music critics. On December 25, 2013, Jahlil Beats released the previously announced Legends Era III. The mixtape contained guest appearances by Lil Wayne, Wiz Khalifa, ASAP Rocky, Future, Tyga, Juicy J, The Game, French Montana, Kid Ink, Kirko Bangz, Meek Mill, The LOX, Ab-Soul, Joey Badass, Action Bronson, Problem, Logic, Gunplay, Dizzy Wright, Vado, Ace Hood, Yo Gotti, Smoke DZA, Trae tha Truth, Project Pat, Trina, Rockie Fresh, and Jae Millz among others. On October 31, 2014, he released a mixtape titled Crack Music 7.


== Production style ==
Although he used samples early in his career, Beats has stated that he is moving away from using samples in his music: "I ain't trying to share my publishing. If you sample they might take 80%, leave you with 20. They getting paid off a record they did 20 years ago. So I like to do a lot of my stuff from scratch because I want all my publishing. I'm stingy with mine." In most of his songs, there can be siren heard throughout the beat. His songs also contain a production tag of his then three-year-old niece saying "Jahlil Beats Holla At Me".


== Personal life ==
His younger brother is record producer The Beat Bully, who produced the Rick Ross, Drake, and French Montana song "Stay Schemin'"; Ross' "So Sophisticated"; and Meek Mill's "House Party". He has three children, Aaliyah, Amari & Ava Tucker whom he shares with his wife Jacqueline Tucker.


== Discography ==
Extended playsLegend Music (2012)
The Blessing (2015)MixtapesCrack Music 1 (2008)
On My Grind (2009)
Crack Music 2 (2009)
Crack Music 3 (2010)
Still On My Grind (2011)
Crack Music 4 (2011)
Crack Music 5 (2011)
Legend Season (2012)
Legend Era (2012)
Crack Music 6 (2012)
Legend Era II (2013)
Genius (2013)
Legend Era III (2013)
808 God (2014)
Crack Music 7 (2014)
God's Plan (2015) (with CRMC)
New Levels, New Devils (2016) (with CRMC)
Fr33 Spirits (2017)


== Production discography ==


=== Singles produced ===


=== Other produced ===


==== 2010 ====
Fabolous – There Is No Competition 2: The Grieving Music EP

08. "Tonight" (featuring Red Café)Meek Mill – Flamerz 3: The Wait Is Over

04. "I'm Tryna" (featuring Mel Luv & E. Ness)
10. "40 On My Hip" (featuring NH & Nitty)
11. "I'm Clean" (featuring Young Dro)
12. "Make Em Say"
13. "Money Like A Mufucka" (featuring K. Smith & Mel Luv)
16. "I Want Em All (featuring Mel Luv)
23. "I'm Killin' Em" (featuring Red Café)Chris Brown & Tyga – Fan Of A Fan

06. "48 Bar Rap"
19. "G Shit"
20. "Holla At Me"Meek Mill – Mr. Philedalphia

02. "Indian Bounce"
03. "Rose Red" (remix) (featuring T.I., Vado, & Rick Ross)
06. "Legggo" (featuring Peedi Crakk, & Young Chris)
14. "Ballin'" (featuring Shizz & Nitty)
18. "Where Dey Do Dat" (featuring Young Chris)
23. "Bullet Wit Ya Name" (featuring Manny Wellz)Gucci Mane – Ferrari Music

09. "Deuces" (remix) (featuring Chris Brown and Tyga) (with Kevin McCall)


==== 2011 ====
Cory Gunz – Son Of A Gun

20. "I'm Fuckin' Wit It" (featuring Young Hash)Meek Mill – Dreamchasers

08. "Tony Story" (featuring Jahlil Beats)


==== 2012 ====
Jadakiss – Consignment

03. "Paper Tags" (featuring Wale, French Montana, and Styles P)Meek Mill – Dreamchasers 2

07. "Flexing"Roscoe Dash – 2.0

04. "Zodiak Sign" (featuring Lloyd)Ace Hood – Body Bag Vol. 2

02. "Wanna Beez"DJ Khaled – Kiss The Ring

01. "Shout Out To The Real" (featuring Meek Mill, Ace Hood, and Plies)Meek Mill – Dreams & Nightmares

03. "Young & Gettin' In" (featuring Kirko Bangz) (produced with TM88 & Southside)Styles P – The Diamond Life Project

02. "Gripping Over There" (featuring French Montana and Pusha T)Skyzoo – Theo vs. J.J. (Dreams vs. Reaality)

11. "#FGR (First Generation Rich)"Avatar Darko – Soviet Goonion

13. "Terminator, Pt. 2"Skyzoo – A Dream Deferred

06. "Range Over Rhythm"Yo Gotti – CM7: The World Is Yours

15. "Ain't No Turning Around"Jeezy – It's Tha World

02. "Knob Broke"


==== 2013 ====
Ace Hood – Starvation 2

14. "Motive" (featuring Kevin Cossom)N.O.R.E. – Student of the Game

17. "Faces Of Death" (featuring Busta Rhymes, French Montana, Raekwon, and Swizz Beatz)Kevin Gates – The Luca Brasi Story

21. "What's Understood"French Montana – Excuse My Fresh

02. "Trap House" (featuring Birdman and Rick Ross)Ash K – Relationships 101

02. "Bonnie & Clyde 13"Problem – The Separation

15. "Do It" (featuring Tyga)Cory Gunz – Datz WTF I'm Taklin Bout

13. "Demons" (featuring Charlie Rock)Reese – DSNRTRAPN

04. "Wakebake" (featuring Buddy)B Money – F.lip A.ll M.oney (advance)

02. Cakin
04. Daily On The Block (featuring Meek Mill and T.I.)Yo Gotti – Nov 19: The Mixtape

08. "Sometimes"Hardhead – Deliberate Mistakes

09. "Nameless Celebrities" (featuring Kid Ink and K-Shawn)Trae Tha Truth – I Am King

13. "I Am King"Casey Veggies & Rockie Fresh – Fresh Veggies

07. "Perception/Love All Around Me" (featuring Kirko Bangz)Scoe – Tha Influence

03. "Hunnid Thousand"
07. "Where They At"


==== 2014 ====
Coke Boys – Coke Boys 4

09. "Worst Nightmare" (featuring Diddy)N.O.R.E. – Noreaster

05. "#FACTS" (featuring Yung Reallie)Skyzoo & Torae – Barrel Brothers

03. "Make You A Believer"Young Scrap – Faded Ambition

06. "Hot Nigga" (freestyle)Ace Hood – Body Bag 3: Beast Mix

06. "Hot Nigga" (Beast mix)Batgang – 4B's

04. "Where Dey At" (performed by Kid Ink, Shitty Montana, and King Los)Problem – 354: Lift Off

04. "Hot Nigga" (featuring Bobby Shmurda)Rich The Kid – Rich Than Famous

04. "Don't Love You"
06. "Wrist Gone Crazy"


==== 2015 ====
Juicy J – Blue Dream & Lean 2

03. "Throw Dem Racks"Dok2 – Multillionaire

06. "Spirit of Ecstasy"The Game – The Documentary 2

05. "Standing on Ferraris" (featuring Diddy)Meek Mill – Single

01. "Monster" (The Get Back Freestyle)Rick Ross – Black Market

07. "Crocodile Python"Jay Park

Lotto


==== 2016 ====
Torae – Entitled

06. "Let 'Em Know"Beanie Sigel -

Top ShottaRoyce da 5'9" – Tabernacle: Trust the Shooter

08. "Rap on Steroids"Tink – Single

01. "Count It Up" (Think Tink)Meek Mill – DC4

13. "Tony Story 3"Juelz Santana – TBA

Time Ticking (with Dave East featuring Rowdy Rebel and Bobby Shmurda
Ol' Thang Back (featuring Jadakiss, Busta Rhymes, Method Man & Redman)


==== 2017 ====
Juelz Santana – TBA

The Get Back (featuring A Boogie Wit da Hoodie)


== References ==Brian Benjamin Green (born January 19, 1988), better known by his stage name Beedie, is an American rapper based out of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Born in New York City to a family of working entertainers, he began his music career in 2007 with fellow Pittsburgh emcee Mac Miller as the duo The Ill Spoken.


== Early life and education ==
Beedie was born in New York City and lived in Washington, D.C. and Oklahoma, before moving to Pittsburgh in 2001 with his mother, Maria Posvar, and younger brother. Posvar graduated from Pittsburgh's Carnegie Mellon University and had done some acting, including a role in Days of Our Lives. His father was a sports announcer. His maternal grandparents are the late Wesley Posvar, who was the Chancellor of the University of Pittsburgh from 1967 to 1991, and his wife Mildred Miller, an opera singer who performed at the Metropolitan Opera from the 1950s to 1970s and then founded the Opera Theater of Pittsburgh.Beedie started writing rhymes starting at age 12. He attended Taylor Allderdice High School, but dropped out after his parents kicked him out of the house. He took classes at Community College of Allegheny County to earn his GED.


== Music career ==


=== The Ill Spoken ===
In 2007, when Beedie was 19, he and 15-year-old Mac Miller (then known as EZ Mac), founded the rap duo The Ill Spoken. After performing at shows around Pittsburgh and releasing How High: The Mixtape with Miller on October 27, 2008, the two emcees began focusing on solo careers. Beedie has cited J. Dilla and Kanye West as musical influences, and describes his sound as "classic hip-hop with a new-school twist".


=== The Beat Bully LP & Varsity Squad ===
On June 30, 2011, Beedie released his first album unofficially, titled The Beat Bully LP. The album was well received by music critics. According to Beedie, this album shows a lot of growth as an artist, and he considers it his official debut. Varsity Squad is a group/crew consisting of emcees Beedie and Jon Quest, who announced the forming of the group while performing alongside Method Man & Redman in Pittsburgh in August 2010. The two emcees released a collaborative album titled New School Boom Bap on February 7, 2012. Their work garnered the attention of many influential underground acts such as One Be Lo of Binary Star, who tapped Varsity Squad for a feature on his 2011 Laborhood Part 2 mixtape in the song "U Minor, We Major", as well as producer Buckwild of DITC.


=== Above The Weather ===
After releasing a stream of viral music videos on YouTube, Beedie released his next solo effort titled Above The Weather on August 13, 2012. The project featured production from the likes of Statik Selektah, Buckwild of DITC and more. The release garnered the attention of many publications including the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette and Pittsburgh City Paper, who featured Beedie for a cover story on September 26, 2012. Soon after, Beedie and Mac Miller reunited to release another track as The Ill Spoken on October 23, 2012. On January 5, 2013, producer Git released a single titled "Magic Spaceship" featuring Sean Price, Beedie and fellow Pittsburgh rapper B. White


=== Counter Culture & work with Wiz Khalifa ===
Beedie appeared on Sirius Radio's Shade 45 station with Statik Selektah on May 30, 2013, where he announced his next release would be titled Counter Culture. After many delays, the album was finally released digitally on December 22, 2015, followed shortly after with a mixtape titled B-$ide$ Vol. 1: Lo$t Dream$ released on Beedie's 28th birthday, January 19, 2016. As suggested by the title, the mixtape featured lost and scrapped songs during the long recording process between Above The Weather and Counter Culture. Around this time Beedie formed a friendship with fellow Pittsburgh artist Wiz Khalifa, who brought out Beedie to perform on various tour dates and eventually featuring on the song "Make A Wish" on Counter Culture.


== Discography ==
Solo AlbumsThe Beat Bully LP (June 30, 2011)
Above The Weather (August 13, 2012)
Counter Culture (December 22, 2015)
Good Things Take Time (November 11, 2019)Solo Mixtapes

Most Slept On (October 30, 2009)
Sleeping In (March 15, 2010)
Ruff Draft: J. Dilla Changed My Life! (February 10, 2011)
B-$ide$ Vol. 1: Lo$t Dream$ (January 19, 2016)With Mac Miller as The Ill SpokenHow High: The Mixtape (October 27, 2008)With Jon Quest as Varsity Squad

New School Boom Bap (February 7, 2012)


== References ==Jeremie Damon Pennick (born November 27, 1984), known professionally as Benny the Butcher or simply Benny, is an American rapper. He is part of the hip hop collective Griselda with frequent collaborators and first-cousins Westside Gunn and Conway the Machine. He is also a part of the collective Black Soprano Family.


== Career ==
Benny the Butcher self-released his mixtapes in the late 2000s as B.E.N.N.Y., including The Mayor's Back and Chains Bond. In 2014, Westside Gunn founded Griselda Records, through which Benny, Conway and Westside Gunn would self-release their own projects. In 2016, Benny released his album titled My First Brick followed by the mixtape Butcher on Steroids with DJ Green Lantern in 2017.On March 3, 2017, Griselda (as a collective), as well as Pennick's cousins Westside Gunn and Conway the Machine, signed a deal with Eminem's Shady Records, a subsidiary of Interscope. In April 2017, Benny the Butcher and his collective Black Soprano Family signed a label deal with Entertainment One Music.On November 23, 2018, he released his debut studio album Tana Talk 3, produced by The Alchemist and Griselda producer Daringer, and includes features from Westside Gunn, Conway the Machine and Royce da 5'9". The album was critically acclaimed and brought widespread attention to the rapper.June 21, 2019 marked the release of his fourth extended play, The Plugs I Met  which included guest appearances from Black Thought, Pusha T, 38 Spesh, Jadakiss, and Conway the Machine. On August 6, it was announced that Pennick signed a management deal with Roc Nation. Writing about Benny the Butcher's 2019 project, Dan-O of Freemusicempire said "Benny The Butcher did an EP with the greatest guest list of the year. Right after the intro skit you hear him next to Black Thought. Next song Jadakiss, and closing out the project with Pusha T's second best guest appearance of 2019 on 18 Wheeler. No matter who was with him Benny blew like Sonny Rollins on the Sax, whether Conway or Eminem was coming on next...it didn't matter. The Butcher has a gift and no fear."On August 27, 2020, Benny the Butcher announced in an interview with Adam22 for No Jumper that he would release an album under eOne called Burden of Proof between late September and early October. The album was eventually released on October 16 to rave reviews.On March 19, 2021, Benny the Butcher released the sequel to The Plugs I Met EP, with a collaboration EP with Harry Fraud, named The Plugs I Met 2. This EP received widespread critical acclaim from various music critics.On November 12, 2021, he officially signed a record deal with Def Jam Recordings for upcoming releases. The announcement was made by American rapper Snoop Dogg, a creative consultant for the label, on Joe Rogan's podcast The Joe Rogan Experience a week after Benny the Butcher was featured on Snoop Dogg's single "Murder Music" alongside Jadakiss and Busta Rhymes.On January 28, 2022, Benny released the single, "Johnny P's Caddy", with rapper J. Cole. The song is the lead single from Benny's then-upcoming album, Tana Talk 4, which he has labeled "album of the year". Tana Talk 4 was eventually released on March 11 to generally favorable reviews.


== Personal life ==
In November 2020, in Houston, Texas, Benny the Butcher was shot in the leg during an attempted robbery in a Walmart parking lot.On October 27, 2021, Benny the Butcher cancelled a concert at Detroit's Saint Andrew's Hall after he was hospitalized with asthma, a condition he has both rapped about and spoken about in interviews. In a verified annotation on Genius's lyric page for his song "Where Would I Go" off the 2020 album Burden of Proof, he wrote he has lived with asthma for 25 years and the condition forces him to go to the emergency room two or three times a year: "I got to be careful, I got to make sure I wear my mask, I got to make sure I'm taking my medicine. Running the streets and being in and out of prison, it's probably something I haven't done the best of. But being older, that's something that I take care of".


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===


=== Extended plays ===


=== Mixtapes ===
Tana Talk (as B.E.N.N.Y.) (2004)
B.E.N.N.Y. vs. Lil Wayne (as B.E.N.N.Y.) (2007)
The American D.Boy (as B.EY.)
American D.Boy II: Lindsay Lohan (as B.E.N.N.Y.)
American D.Boy III: Paris Hilton & Kate Moss (as B.E.N.N.Y.)
American D.Boy IV: Amy Winehouse (as B.E.N.N.Y.) (2009)
American D.Boy V (as. B.E.N.N.Y.) (2009)
The Mayor's Back (as B.E.N.N.Y.) (2009)
Tana Talk 2 (as B.E.N.N.Y.) (2009)
Chains Bond (as 2 Chain Bennymane) (2009)
Benny Montana (as B.E.N.N.Y.) (2010)
Married 2 Da Game: The Mixtape (as B.E.N.N.Y.)  (2011)
The White House (as B.E.N.N.Y.) (2012)
Best Ever n' New York (as B.E.N.N.Y.) (2013)
B.E.N.N.Y. Best Ever (as B.E.N.N.Y.) (2013)
Black Soprano Family (as Benny) (2015)
1 on a 1 (2016)
My First Brick (2016)


=== Collaboration albums ===
Butcher on Steroids (with DJ Green Lantern) (2017)Trust the Sopranos (with 38 Spesh)  (2021)


=== Collaboration mixtapes ===
Best of the Underworld (as B.E.N.N.Y. with Johnal) (2006)
Cocaine Cowboys (as B.E.N.N.Y. with .38 Special) (2009)
Who Wants What (with Street Entertainment and DJ Kay Slay) (2006)
SE Gang Bang Bang (with Street Entertainment) (2005)
The Pre-season: Mixtape Series (with Buff City Music Group) (2012)
Stabbed & Shot (with 38 Spesh) (2018)
Searchin' for a Purpose (with Black Soprano Family) (2020)
Da Respected Sopranos (with Black Soprano Family and DJ Drama) (2020)
Long Live DJ Shay (with Black Soprano Family) (2022)


=== With Griselda ===
WWCD (2019)


=== Charted songs ===


=== Music videos ===


== Filmography ==


== References ==Raymond Leon Scott (born July 18, 1965), better known by his stage name Benzino, is an American urban media proprietor, television personality, rapper, and record producer. He produced records (as part of the production team Hangmen 3) and co-owned the magazine The Source.


== Career ==
Benzino has said one of the primary inspirations to enter the genre of rap stems from his fondness of the film Wild Style.Benzino was a founding member of rap groups the Almighty RSO and Made Men. He has appeared on the reality television show Love & Hip Hop: Atlanta, since 2012.


=== Feud with Eminem ===
Benzino is known for being involved since 2002 in a widely publicized feud with rapper Eminem; the feud began after his The Source magazine rated The Eminem Show as four mics out of five. Eminem blamed the magazine and its co-founder Benzino for what he considered an unfair rating. Benzino  even refused to help promote his movie 8 Mile during his performance in Puerto Rico. Benzino later released diss tracks towards Eminem, titled "Pull Your Skirt Up" (calling him "2003 Vanilla Ice") and "Die Another Day", while Eminem released "The Sauce" and "Nail in the Coffin". As a continuation of this animosity between the two, Benzino released the diss mixtape Benzino Presents: Die Another Day: Flawless Victory, further disparaging Eminem.


== Personal life ==
Scott considered Edward DeJesus to be his father figure, especially in the duration of DeJesus's incarceration. Scott's sister Maureen is a medical doctor, and his other sister, Anita Scott-Wilson, has a doctorate degree in veterinary medicine from the Tuskegee Institute. Coi Leray is Scott's daughter.He has dated Karlie Redd and Althea Heart. Scott and Heart had a son together in November 2015, but they broke off their engagement shortly thereafter. They appeared together on Season 6 of the television show Marriage Boot Camp chronicling their broken relationship.On March 29, 2014, Scott was shot after attending his mother's funeral in Duxbury, Massachusetts. He suffered non-life-threatening injuries when the bullets hit his shoulder and back. His 36-year-old nephew Gai Scott was later arrested for the shooting.


== Legal issues ==
On April 16, 2019, Scott was stopped in Brookhaven, Georgia and cited for driving an uninsured vehicle. He was not the policy holder responsible for insuring the vehicle.On June 22, 2019, Scott was arrested for a bench warrant in DeKalb County, Georgia. Scott was taken to police headquarters for booking and was later jailed. As he was being transported there, he launched a racist tirade against a police officer arresting him, who was of Vietnamese descent. The tirade involved multiple racial slurs and maternal insults.On July 31, 2020, Scott was arrested and charged with criminal damage to property. He was accused of damaging the Chevrolet Silverado pickup truck of a man who was in the company of Scott's ex-fiancé Althea Heart.On February 3, 2022, Scott was arrested and charged with one count of second degree criminal damage to property, a felony.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===
The Benzino Project (2001)
Redemption (2003)
Arch Nemesis (2005)
The Antidote (2007)


=== Collaboration albums ===
In Tha Company of Killaz with Wiseguys (1996)
Doomsday: Forever RSO with the Almighty RSO (1996)
Classic Limited Edition with Made Men (1999)
No Skits Vol. 1 with Hangmen 3 (2000)


=== Remix albums ===
The Benzino Remix Project (2002)


=== Mixtapes ===
Die Another Day: Flawless Victory (2003)
When the Heavens Fall with 1st 48 (2010)
Caezar (2011)
Blue Bag with 1st 48 (2011)
The Magnificent 757's with Stevie J (2012)
Crushed Ice (2013)
Welcome to Texaco City with OJ da Juiceman (2015)


=== Charted singles ===
"Rock the Party" (2002, US No. 82)


== Filmography ==


=== Television ===


== References ==


== External links ==
Hip Hop Weekly magazine official website
Real World Police: Racist Tirade Against Asian Cop By Ex-"Love & Hip Hop" Star Benzino #TMZFail You Tube channel showing open record videos of arrestsBesnik E. Sadikay (Albanian pronunciation: [ˈbɛsnik 'sadikaj]; born August 26, 1984), better known by the stage name Big Body Bes is an American rapper and TV presenter. He is best known for his association with Action Bronson, who describes Bes as his "Albanian cousin". He has been heavily featured on Action Bronson's musical and television projects.


== Early life ==
Bes was born in New York City to Albanian parents who immigrated from southern Albania in 1983. He was raised in the quiet Lindenwood section of New York City. Bes met future collaborators Meyhem Lauren and Action Bronson at the age of 15. Bes received the nickname "Big Body" due to his large stature.


== Career ==
Bes began his music career in 2011 at the age of 27, on Action Bronson's debut album Dr. Lecter with his forte of spoken word, a strong composition of the elements of NYC street life, economic struggle and barbaric humor. Bes rejects the notion that he's a "hypeman" or that his features on Bronson's songs are "skits", going as far as to say "...I wouldn’t even call them features, I would call them experiences". He considers his "breakout" appearance to be his feature on "9-24-11" off Bronson's mixtape Blue Chips.Starting in 2016, Bes has also been on a TV show called Traveling the Stars: Action Bronson and Friends Watch 'Ancient Aliens'. Other hosts include Action Bronson, Knxwledge, ScHoolboy Q, Earl Sweatshirt, Tyler, The Creator, Andy Milonakis, Dirt Nasty, MC Eiht, The Alchemist, Eric André, Too $hort, and Melissa Etheridge. In the first episode of the series, Bes declares he doesn't believe in dinosaurs.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===
Body Language (TBA)


=== Guest appearances ===


== Filmography ==


== Videography ==


== References ==Antonio Hardy (born September 10, 1968), better known by his stage name Big Daddy Kane, is an American rapper, producer and actor who began his career in 1986 as a member of the Juice Crew. He is widely regarded as one of the most influential and skilled MCs in hip hop. Rolling Stone ranked his song "Ain't No Half-Steppin'" number 25 on its list of The 50 Greatest Hip-Hop Songs of All Time, calling him "a master wordsmith of rap's late-golden age and a huge influence on a generation of MCs".


== Biography ==


=== 1980s ===
In 1984, Kane became friends with Biz Markie, and he would co-write some of Biz's best-known lyrics. Both eventually became important members of the Queens-based Juice Crew, a collective headed by renowned producer Marley Marl. Kane signed with Tyrone Williams's (Marl's manager) and Len Fichtelberg's Cold Chillin' Records label in 1987 and debuted the same year with the 12" single "Raw", which was an underground hit. The name Big Daddy Kane came from a variation on Caine, David Carradine's character from the TV show Kung Fu (1972–1975), and a character called "Big Daddy" whom Vincent Price played in the film Beach Party (1963).Kane is known for his ability to syncopate over faster hip hop beats, and despite his asthmatic condition, he is acknowledged as one of the pioneering masters of fast rhyming. His sense of style is renowned and set a number of late-1980s and early-1990s hip hop trends (high-top fades hairstyles, velour suits, and four-finger rings). The backronym "King Asiatic Nobody's Equal" is often applied to his moniker.
He released his debut album on Cold Chillin' Records in the early summer of 1988 called Long Live the Kane, which featured the hit "Ain't No Half Steppin'". The following year, Kane released his second album and biggest hit to date, It's a Big Daddy Thing, which included 1970s sample throwbacks like "Smooth Operator" and the Teddy Riley-produced track "I Get the Job Done", which hit the R&B top 40 during the closing of the 1980s. He also had a memorable verse on the Marley Marl-produced track "The Symphony" released in late 1988, which included Juice Crew members Craig G, Masta Ace, and Kool G Rap.


=== 1990s ===
Big Daddy Kane appeared on Patti LaBelle's 1991 effort, "Burnin'". He provided the rap chorus to the single "Feels Like Another One". He also appeared on the video release "Live in New York".
He contributed the song "'Nuff Respect" to the soundtrack of Ernest Dickerson's feature film debut Juice, which starred Omar Epps and Tupac Shakur, further demonstrating his fast lyrical delivery.
In 1991, Kane won the Grammy Award for Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group for his performance on the Quincy Jones collaborative track "Back on the Block" from the album of the same name.
Widely regarded as one of the greatest rappers during the golden age of hip hop, Kane's experimentation with R&B beats and his alignment to the Five Percent Nation drew criticism. Later albums, such as Looks Like a Job For..., were acclaimed, but he was never able to return to the commercial and artistic success of It's a Big Daddy Thing. However, he still tours extensively.
As an actor, he debuted in Mario Van Peebles' 1993 western Posse, and appeared in Robert Townsend's 1993 film The Meteor Man. He also posed for Playgirl and Madonna's book Sex during the 1990s.
During the early 1990s, Jay-Z toured with Kane, and Kane helped him early on in his career. Ice-T says: "I actually met Jay-Z with Kane. Kane brought Jay-Z over to my house."
Kane himself says that Jay-Z was not technically his hypeman in the true sense of the term: "he wasn't a hypeman, he basically made cameo appearances on stage. When I would leave the stage to go change outfits, I would bring out Jay-Z and Positive K and let them freestyle until I came back to the stage."
Jay-Z was also featured on Big Daddy Kane's track "Show & Prove" from Daddy's Home (1994), as well as in the video.In 1995, Kane recorded with MC Hammer and Tupac Shakur on the rap song "Too Late Playa" (along with Danny Boy). He was also mentioned to signing with Death Row East in 1996. In 1997, Kane teamed up with Frankie Cutlass on his third single title "The Cypher Part 3" and some of Marley Marl Juice Crew veterans. In 1998, he released his final solo album to date, Veteranz' Day. It received mixed reviews and did not sell well. However, Kane did not give up rapping and made many appearances in the 2000s.


=== 2000s ===
In 2000, Big Daddy Kane appeared on Tony Touch's "The Piece Maker" mixtape alongside Kool G Rap and KRS-One. A rejuvenated Kane occasionally collaborated with a variety of hip-hop artists, including A Tribe Called Quest, Jurassic 5, Little Brother, and DJ Babu of the Beat Junkies. He released two singles, the Alchemist-produced "The Man, The Icon", and the DJ Premier-produced "Any Type of Way" (on which he discusses urban collapse in post-9/11 New York City ("Giuliani got New York lookin' like it's Amistad")) and the erosion of the middle class.
Big Daddy Kane appeared on the trip hop group Morcheeba's 2003 single "What's Your Name".
In 2005, Big Daddy Kane was honored during the VH1 Hip-Hop Honors. After a medley of hits performed by T.I., Black Thought, and Common, he came out to perform "Warm It Up, Kane" with his old dancers, Scoob and Scrap. Kane and Kool G Rap can both be seen briefly in Dave Chappelle's Block Party.
In 2006, he appeared as a guest MC on the track "Get Wild Off This", produced by the Stanton Warriors for their Stanton Sessions Vol. 2 breaks mix. He also appeared alongside the Wu-Tang Clan, Rakim, and his longtime friends Busta Rhymes and Q-Tip in a segment of the 2006 Summer Jam concert (June 7, 2006), as part of an initiative by Busta Rhymes to honor the legacy of New York City hip-hop.
In 2007, a new track, "BK Mentality", was released on the mixtape compilation Official Joints. Kane also appeared on Joell Ortiz's The Brick: Bodega Chronicles mixtape.
Big Daddy Kane made a cameo in the 2008 video for "Game's Pain", a track by rapper The Game. The video also featured appearances by Raekwon, Three 6 Mafia and Ice Cube. The Game also referenced Jay-Z's former occupation as Kane's hypeman: "Ask a Jay-Z fan about Big Daddy Kane: Don't know him, Game gon' show 'em". He also appeared on the remix of "Don't Touch Me" by Busta Rhymes.
Also in 2009, Kane played the role of Clay in the film Just Another Day. The film is the tale of two rappers, one poor and young, one older and successful. The movie follows them through a day of their lives.


=== 2010s ===
Big Daddy Kane appears on one track on MA Doom: Son of Yvonne—the collaboration between MF Doom and former Juice Crew member Masta Ace.
As of 2013, Kane was recruited by New York City power group Lifted Crew and R&B singer Showtyme to form a band called "Las Supper". The album, Back to the Future, was released on March 26, 2013.
On November 24, 2014, Big Daddy Kane discussed his upbringing, childhood influences, relationships, sexual experiences and Madonna's 1992 book Sex in an interview on the Dr. Zoe Today show. In 2016, he was featured on Tito Jackson's single "Get It Baby" in addition to appearing in the documentary Hip-Hop Evolution.


=== 2020s ===
In June 2020, Kane released the single "Enough", aimed at addressing issues surrounding police brutality.


== Legacy ==
Big Daddy Kane is regarded as one of the most influential and skilled golden age rappers.MTV put him at No. 7 in their "Greatest MCs of All Time" list. He is placed at No. 4 in Kool Moe Dee's book There's a God on the Mic: The True 50 Greatest MCs. About.com ranked him No. 3 on its list of the "Top 50 MCs of Our Time", and RZA listed him as one of his "Top 5 best MCs". In 2012, The Source ranked him No. 8 on their list of the "Top 50 Lyricists of All Time".AllMusic says "his best material ranks among the finest hip-hop of its era, and his sex-drenched persona was enormously influential on countless future would-be players", and describes him as "an enormously talented battle MC", "one of rap's major talents", refers to his "near-peerless technique" and "first-rate technique and rhyming skills", and says he "had the sheer verbal facility and razor-clean dexterity to ambush any MC and exhilarate anyone who witnessed or heard him perform".Kool Moe Dee describes him as "one of the most imitated emcees ever in the game" and "one of the true greatest emcees ever". Ice-T stated:

"To me, Big Daddy Kane is still today one of the best rappers. I would put Big Daddy Kane against any rapper in a battle. Jay-Z, Nas, Eminem, any of them. I could take his 'Raw' "swagger" from 88 and put it up against any record [from today]. Kane is one of the most incredible lyricists... and he will devour you on the mic. I don't want to try to out-rap Big Daddy Kane. Big Daddy Kane can rap circles around cats."
His first two albums are also considered hip hop classics and Rolling Stone says, "he has received consistent critical kudos".
In the book Rap-Up: The Ultimate Guide to Hip-Hop and R&B, Cameron and Devin Lazerine say Big Daddy Kane is "widely seen as one of the best lyricists of his time and even today regularly gets name-checked by younger dudes", and music journalist Peter Shapiro says Kane is "perhaps the most complete MC ever".Eminem references Big Daddy Kane in the lyrics to his song "Yellow Brick Road" from his album Encore, saying, "we (Eminem and Proof) was on the same shit, that Big Daddy Kane shit, where compound syllables sound combined", and he quotes the same lines in his book The Way I Am—this illustrates how Big Daddy Kane had an influence on both Eminem's and Proof's rhyme technique.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===
Long Live the Kane (1988)
It's a Big Daddy Thing (1989)
Taste of Chocolate (1990)
Prince of Darkness (1991)
Looks Like a Job For... (1993)
Daddy's Home (1994)
Veteranz' Day (1998)


=== Collaboration albums ===
Back to the Future with The Las Supper (2013)


== Filmography ==
1993 Posse as "Father Time"
1993 The Meteor Man as "Pirate" 
2005 Dave Chappelle's Block Party as Himself.
2007 Dead Heist  Hunter
2008 Love for Sale
2009 Just Another Day as Clay
2016 Exposed as Jonathan "Black" Jones
2018 Law & Order: Special Victims Unit as Ray Wallis / "Four Stroke"


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website
Big Daddy Kane at IMDbChristopher Lee Rios (November 10, 1971 – February 7, 2000), better known by his stage name Big Pun (short for Big Punisher), was a 
Puerto Rican-American rapper.  Emerging from the underground hip hop scene in the Bronx borough of New York City in the early 1990s, he came to prominence upon being discovered by fellow Bronx rapper Fat Joe, and made his earliest appearance on his 1995 album Jealous One's Envy.
In 1997, Big Pun signed with Fat Joe's label, Terror Squad Productions in conjunction with RCA and Loud Records as a solo artist. The same year, he released his Grammy-nominated debut studio album Capital Punishment in April 1998 to critical acclaim and commercial success, peaking at No. 5 on the Billboard 200 and becoming the first solo hip hop record by a Latino artist to go Platinum.


== Early life ==
Rios was born in The South Bronx in New York City to parents of Puerto Rican descent. He grew up in the Soundview neighborhood and had at least two sisters and one brother. He regularly played basketball and trained in boxing.He moved out of his mother's house at age 15 and was homeless for a period of time in the late 1980s. Later, he received a large settlement from the city stemming from an incident in 1976, where Rios broke his leg while playing in a park. Using his settlement money, Rios married his high school sweetheart, Liza, and the two moved into a home together.
Rios struggled with depression stemming from his turbulent childhood, and he coped with it by overeating. Between the ages of 18 and 21, Rios' weight rocketed from 180 lb (82 kg) to 300 lb (140 kg); he was consequently unable to tie his own shoes.


== Career ==
During the late 1980s, he began writing rap lyrics. He later formed the underground group Full-A-Clips with Lyrical Assassin, Joker Jamz and Toom. Rios made a number of recordings with the group in the 1990s, which have not been released. At this point Rios was operating under the alias Big Moon Dawg. After changing his stage name to Big Punisher, Rios met fellow Puerto Rican and Bronx rapper Fat Joe in 1995 and made his commercial debut on Fat Joe's second album, Jealous One's Envy, in addition to appearing on the song, "Watch Out". He also appeared on The Beatnuts' song "Off the Books".


=== Capital Punishment (1997–1998) ===
In 1997, Big Pun began recording songs for his debut album Capital Punishment. In 1997, producer Knobody's production partner Sean C took advantage of his new role as A&R at Loud Records to play Knobody's tracks to Big Pun. Suitably impressed, the rapper hired Knobody to remix "I'm Not a Player". The remixed song, featuring Joe and titled "Still Not a Player", became Big Pun's first major mainstream hit and major breakthrough for Knobody. The full-length debut Capital Punishment followed in 1998, and became the first album by a solo Latino rapper to go platinum, peaking at No. 5 on the Billboard 200. Capital Punishment was also nominated for the Grammy Award for Best Rap Album.


=== The Terror Squad collaboration album (1999–2000) ===
Big Pun became a member of Terror Squad, a New York–based group of rappers founded by Fat Joe, with most of the roster supplied by the now-defunct Full-A-Clips who released their debut album The Album in 1999. The album did not fare well commercially but it was well received critically and the album was meant to start the foundation for all other Terror Squad members to release their solo projects.


== Health problems and death ==
Rios struggled with weight issues his entire adult life. He weighed 180 pounds (82 kg) at age 18, which increased to 300 pounds (140 kg) at 21. His weight fluctuated in the early 1990s between obese and morbidly obese. Rios enrolled in a weight-loss program at Duke University in 1999, and shed 80 pounds (36 kg), but he prematurely quit the program and eventually regained the weight. His weight was a constant topic of argument among him and his friends, to the point that Rios would not eat around them.On February 5, 2000, Rios withdrew from a planned Saturday Night Live performance with Fat Joe and Jennifer Lopez due to illness. Two days later while staying at a hotel with his family in White Plains, New York, he suffered a heart attack and respiratory failure and was taken to a hospital, where he died at the age of 28 after paramedics were unable to revive him. His weight had reached a peak of 698 pounds (317 kg) at the time of his death. Rios was survived by his wife, Liza, and their three children, Star, Vanessa and Christopher Jr.


== Posthumous works and legacy ==
Big Pun's second album, Yeeeah Baby, completed after his death, was released in April 2000. It peaked at No. 3 on the Billboard charts and earned gold record status within three months of its release. A posthumous compilation album, Endangered Species, was released in April 2001. Endangered Species collected some of Pun's greatest hits, previously unreleased material, numerous guest appearances, and remixed "greatest verses." As with his other albums, it also peaked in the top ten of the Billboard 200, reaching No. 7, but didn't sell as much as the previous Big Pun albums had. He collaborated with Fat Joe on Duets: The Final Chapter, an album of tracks featuring The Notorious B.I.G., also deceased. The track "Get Your Grind On" begins with a Big Pun radio interview in which he said he would perform a duet with Biggie at the gates of heaven. Pun was also featured on a track from the revived Terror Squad's second album, True Story, on the track "Bring 'Em Back" with Big L, another deceased rapper.
On May 2, 2001, the New York City Council stalled plans to rename a small portion of Rogers Place as a tribute, due to distaste over Big Pun's lyrics that "include[d] profanity and references to violence and drug dealing".A second posthumous album was planned for release by Sony Music Entertainment in 2006 but was shelved due to a dispute with producer John "Jellybean" Benitez, who owned the publishing rights to many of the intended album's tracks. In June 2005, Liza Rios put her husband's $100,000 custom Terror Squad medallion up for auction on eBay, citing financial difficulties due to receiving no royalties from Pun's album sales.On March 22, 2021, the intersection of East Fordham Rd and Grand Concourse in his native Bronx was named "Big Pun Plaza" in Pun's honor. A ceremony including family, friends, and local politicians preceded the street naming.


== Discography ==

Studio albumsCapital Punishment (1998)
Yeeeah Baby (2000)Collaboration albumThe Album with Terror Squad (1999)Posthumous compilation albumEndangered Species (2001)


=== Singles ===


==== As featured performer ====


=== Music videos ===


== Filmography ==


== Awards and nominations ==


=== Grammy Awards ===


== References ==


== External links ==
Big Pun at IMDb
XXL
Capital Punishment Tribute
Liza Rios Talks About Her Husband's Legacy in 2010 Interview (1:45:00)Cary Guy (born December 13, 1961), better known as Big Shug,  is an American rapper from Boston, Massachusetts, a co-founder of Gang Starr and a member of the Gang Starr Foundation collective.


== Biography ==
Born in Boston, Cary spent much of his early life in Boston's Mattapan area (known locally as "Murdapan"). Growing up, he forged a friendship with rapper Guru, leading to them eventually founding the group Gang Starr in Morehouse College with Shug's younger brother DJ Suave D. The group disbanded when Shug was imprisoned and eventually Guru moved to New York, where he added DJ Premier to Gang Starr.
On his release, Shug again hooked up with Guru, joined the Gang Starr Foundation, and contributed to each of Gang Starr's albums, beginning with Hard to Earn in 1994 (on "F.A.L.A."). He also appeared on DJ Krush's Meiso in 1995 as well as "The Militia" from 1998's Moment of Truth, and contributed to Guru's Jazzmatazz albums.During the 1990s, Shug recorded a few 12-inch singles produced by DJ Premier for Payday and Chrysalis, but his first proper solo album, Who's Hard was not released until 2005 and half of the songs were handled by DJ Premier.He signed to New York's Babygrande in 2007, and released his second album, Streetchamp. The album was produced by MoSS and DJ Premier and features guest appearances from DJ Premier and Sean Price.A third solo album, Otherside of the Game, was released in November 2008, and features DJ Premier, Bumpy Knuckles, Billy Danze of M.O.P., Termanology, Blaq Poet, and Singapore Kane.  He performed at the 2009 Boston hemp fest.He is featured on the single "Tap Out", which appears on M-Dot & DJ Jean Maron's 2010 album Run MPC. The video of "tap out" was directed by Steven TAPIA. In 2010 he also collaborated with (artist) Aztech and (producer) Reel Drama on their album Hybrid Genetics. In 2010 he collaborated with west coast hip hop artist Spinz  on a song called "Round Tha World" that was recorded while touring Europe. In 2012 he worked again with Dj Jean Maron for the release of the official remix of "Heavy" a posse cut with M-Dot, Benefit & B.A.M (M.O.P/Lil Fame's cousin).
In 2013 Guy appeared in two movies.  In the HBO movie "Clear History," he was door security for the band Chicago.  In "The Heat," starring Sandra Bullock and Melissa McCarthy, he was "Tough Guy #2." He also appeared in  Boston-based films "The Town", and "Black Mass".
Big Shug released his most recent studio album "Triple OGzus" in March 2015. Shug's upcoming project is entitled "The Living Room Project" according to his Instagram page. As of January 2019, there is no word on the release date of the album. In January 2019, Big Shug announced his new album will be entitled “The Diamond Report” while “The Living Room Project” has been rumored to have been shelved or pushed off but Shug has not confirmed this.
A promotional single entitled "Still Big" for Shug's new album coming out later that month was released on October 7. On October 25, 2019, Big Shug released his seventh studio album "The Diamond Report". On the same day, Shug released the first single from the album "EMF" which was produced by long time friend of Guy, DJ Premier. The following week, Big Shug was featured on Gang Starr's newest album "One of the Best Yet" on two tracks, "One of the Best Yet (Big Shug Interlude)" and "Take Flight (Militia, Pt. 4)".
Big Shug's music is known to frequently be featured on DJ Premier's radio show on Sirius XM.


== Personal life ==
In 2012 and 2014, Big Shug led his Braintree Youth Basketball team to two championships. In 2013, he was defeated in the semi-final which led him to saying "Damn, these kids sign up to hoop, but they can't hoop. They damn bad." This caused an uproar from parents of players in the Braintree Youth Basketball organization. The BYB committee later handed him a two-game suspension which was appealed. After a local court session, the suspension was overturned due to Shug's right to the first amendment. This led to Shug being "pissed off". This made him go into the 2013-14 season on fire. He coached his team led by his son, Trumayne "The Big Dawg" Guy to a second championship in three years. Due to his tremendous season, Shug was awarded "BYB Coach of the Year". In his winning speech, he said "What I said last year was totally disrespectful to all players trying to get better at basketball, a game I love. I'm not apologizing fam' because it was my freedom of speech to say that but I'm happy that I was able to win this year and help make a group of good basketball players great."


== Discography ==
Never Say Die: The Pre-Album (2005)
Who's Hard? (2005)
Street Champ (2007)
Otherside of the Game (2008)
I.M. 4-EVA (2012)
Triple OGzus (2015) 
The Diamond Report (2019)
The Living Room Project (TBA)


== References ==


== External links ==
Hernandez, Pedro (2007) "Big Shug :: Street Champ :: Babygrande Records", RapReviews
"Big Shug Interview", DJBooth.net
"Big Shug Interview", Riotsound.com
Kordich, Jason (2007) "The Street Champ Speaks: An interview with Big Shug", Jive MagazineBrandon Chase Korn (born March 15, 1991), professionally known as Bkorn, is an American record producer. Bkorn is best known for producing for Travis Scott, DJ Khaled, Nav, PnB Rock, Chris Brown, Lil Kim, Chinx, Lil Wayne, and more.  In August 2015, Bkorn signed a publishing deal with Sony/ATV Music Publishing.


== Early life ==
Bkorn has been playing and writing music since he was 11 years old. As an avid rock and metal music fan, he began play the drums in 5th grade for band class, then self-taught himself how to play both guitar and bass." In 2009, Bkorn started to produce primarily hip hop and R&B music using the Apple software application GarageBand typically producing Electronic dance music and cover versions of other popular songs. From there, he became more serious about a career in music production. In 2011, Bkorn graduated from University of Hartford with an Associate's degree in Contemporary Arts, and in 2014 he graduated from Ramapo College with a Bachelor's degree in Music Production.


== Career ==


=== Career beginnings ===
Bkorn continued producing throughout his college career, using Logic Pro to make beats. In 2012, Bkorn interned at Puff Daddy's studio, Daddy's House Recording Studio. In 2013, Bkorn landed his first placement on DJ Khaled's 7th studio album Suffering from Success. The song was "I'm Still".


=== Present ===
Since then, Bkorn has co-produced DJ Khaled's 2014 RIAA Gold certified Hold You Down and the 2015 single "How Many Times"; as well as late rapper Chinx's first album single "On Your Body".
In August 2015, Bkorn signed a publishing deal with Sony/ATV Music Publishing. Bkorn has also stated that he is interested in exploring pop and dance-pop music genres as well. More recently he worked on song Stargazing in the critically acclaimed album Astroworld by Travis Scott


== Production discography ==


=== Singles produced ===


=== 2014 ===
DJ Khaled - I Changed a Lot 

14 Hold You Down Remix featuring Usher, Rick Ross, Fabolous and Ace HoodZack

Shots Going Off (featuring Chinx) Chinx - Cocaine Riot 4 

12 Thank You (featuring French Montana and Bynoe)


=== 2015 ===
Chinx - Cocaine Riot 5

12 Point Blank (featuring Zack) Chinx - Welcome to JFK

09 Don't Mind Me (featuring MeetSims)Chinx

On Your Body (Remix) featuring Rick Ross & Meet Sims Omelly - On My Time Vol. 1

04 We Did That (featuring Meek Mill)PnB Rock - RNB 3

02 What U Want


== References ==Ramel Leroy Gill (born October 18, 1973), better known by his stage name Black Child, is an American rapper from New York City. He is best known for his time being signed to Irv Gotti's Murder Inc. Records and being affiliated with Irv Gotti, Ashanti, and Ja Rule. He appeared on hit singles with Ja Rule and did various songs with other members of Murder Inc.


== Early life ==
Gill was born in Brooklyn, New York. His family moved to Queens when he was young. During his childhood years, one of family friends wrote verses for him at the age of 11. While Gill was spitting rhymes in his neighborhood, he began to write some of his own rhymes to use that motivation from his family and friends.  Learning his ways of life, he had a few run-ins with the law, doing time in jail for a gun case that lasted only 30 months, while after being signed by Jam Master Jay Records (now defunct after Jay's death in 2002) in 1993, which was a label owned by the late DJ Jam Master Jay. Before that, he was already making songs with a few other aspiring upcoming artists who were trying to make a name for themselves, including Irv Gotti who was under the moniker DJ Irv (whose Gill was around at that time) produced "Can I Live" for Jay-Z off the Reasonable Doubt album and Ja Rule with "Cash Money Click" featuring Nemesis and Chris Black. While being incarcerated, he began to write rhymes, joining freestyle battles and showing his unique talent to infiltrate the rap world. After spending a few years in jail, Gill reached out to Ja Rule, showing him his lyrical ability to prove himself as a rapper which Ja Rule liked and accepted him to sign with Murder Inc after being released from Jam Master Jay Records due to a gun charge.


== Feud with 50 Cent ==
Black Child has also been involved in the Murder Inc. and G-Unit feud, where he, Ja Rule, and other Murder Inc. associates had an altercation with 50 Cent, Tony Yayo, and G-Unit associates at The Hit Factory in New York City, March 2000. Black Child admitted that he stabbed 50 Cent, saying it was in self defense and 50 was the one reaching for a gun. He released a diss song called "The Real Wanksta" which attacked 50 Cent labeling him as an informant, which Black Child claims that 50 Cent had filed an order of protection on Murder Inc.


== Appearances ==
1999: "Holla Holla (Remix)"  (Ja Rule featuring Jay-Z, Vita, Tah Murdah, Memphis Bleek, Black Child & Busta Rhymes)
1999: "We Don't Give A What"  (Ja Rule featuring Tah Murdah, Black Child)
1999: "Murda 4 Life (Video Version)"  (Ja Rule featuring Tah Murdah & Black Child)
1999: "WhereDaPaperAt?" (Cha Cha featuring Memphis Bleek, Ja Rule, Bareda & Black Child)
1999: "We Here Now" (Ja Rule featuring Black Child)
1999: "Nigguz Theme" (Ja Rule featuring Case & Black Child)
1999: "The Murderers" (Ja Rule featuring Tah Murdah & Black Child)
2000: "Gunrunner" (50 Cent featuring Black Child)
2000: "Die" (Ja Rule featuring Tah Murdah & Black Child)
2000: "Extasy" (Ja Rule featuring Tah Murdah, Jayo Felony & Black Child)
2001: "He Loves U Not (Bad Boy Remix)"  Dream (band) featuring Black Child & P. Diddy) 
2001: "The Inc." (Ja Rule featuring Tah Murdah, Ashanti & Black Child)
2001: "Worldwide Gangsta" (Ja Rule featuring Tah Murdah, Boo & Gotti & Black Child)
2001: "My Dogz Iz My Gunz" (Sticky Fingaz featuring Black Child)
2001: "Vita Vita Vita"  (Vita featuring Tah Murdah, Ja Rule & Black Child) 
2002: "State To State"  (Ja Rule & Black Child)
2002: "Ride Wit Us"  (Irv Gotti featuring Black Child, Jody Mack, O-1, Young Merc, D.O. Cannon, Ronnie Bumps, Caddilac Tah & Chink Santana)
2002: "We Still Don't Give A Fuck" (Irv Gotti featuring Ronnie Bumps, D.O. Cannon, Rah, Jody Mack, O-1, Charlie Baltimore, Black Child & Tah Murdah)
2002: "1 Hearse, 2 Suburbans"  (Irv Gotti featuring Black Child, Tah Murdah, Ronnie Bumps, Eastwood & Crooked I) 
2002: "O.G."  (Irv Gotti featuring Black Child)
2002: "Breakup 2 Makeup (Remix)" (Ashanti featuring Black Child)
2002: "No One Does It Better (Remix)"  (Ashanti featuring Tah Murdah, Black Child & Ja Rule)
2003: "Things Gon' Change" (Ja Rule featuring Young Merc, D.O. Cannons & Black Child)
2003: "The INC is Back" (Ja Rule featuring Sekou 720, Shadow & Black Child)
2004: "Last of the Mohicans" (Ja Rule featuring Black Child)
2004: "Gun Talk" (Ja Rule featuring Black Child)
2004: "Bout My Business" (Ja Rule featuring Young Merc, Tah Murdah & Black Child)
2005: "Only U" (Remix) (Ashanti featuring Black Child, Ja Rule, Merce & Tah Murdah)
2007: "Prison" (Hussein Fatal featuring Hoodstock & Black Child)


== Filmography ==
Cash Rules (2008)
Animal (2005)
Kojak (2005)
All Bets Off: Part 2 (2005)
All Bets Off: Part 1 (2005)
Kind of Blue (2005)
Hitman (2005)
Tales(series)coldhearted (2017)
Beef (2003)


== References ==


== External links ==
Black Child discography at Discogs
Black Child at IMDb
Black Child on TwitterRobert Ross (June 8, 1968 – April 17, 2021), known professionally as Black Rob, was an American rapper who was signed to Sean "Puffy" Combs' Bad Boy Entertainment. He was best known for his 2000 single "Whoa!", which peaked at number 43 on the Billboard Hot 100.


== Career ==
Ross grew up in East Harlem and began rapping between the ages of 11 and 12. He was inspired by the artists he listened to regularly, including Spoonie Gee, Doug E. Fresh, and Slick Rick. When he was 22, he joined his first rap group, the Schizophrenics, though they did not release any albums. He initially rapped under the alias "Bacardi Rob".He began associating with the Bad Boy label as early as 1996, appearing on the Bad Boy remix to 112's "Come See Me". He was then featured on several Bad Boy releases, including remixes to Total's "What About Us" (1997) and Faith Evans's "Love Like This" (1998), the song "24 Hrs. to Live" (1997) from Mase, and albums by Puff Daddy & the Bad Boy Family (1997) and The Notorious B.I.G. (1999). He also made two appearances on Cru's 1997 album Da Dirty 30, as well as albums by Channel Live, Benzino, Tony Touch, and others. These guest appearances earned him media buzz.In his earlier years, Black Rob headed the street rap team which he named "Alumni". His debut album Life Story was released in 1999 and rose above platinum sales. In early 2000, he released the hit single "Whoa!". Produced by Diggin' in the Crates Crew member Buckwild, "Whoa!" became his biggest hit. The song peaked at number 43 on the Billboard Hot 100 and reached the top 10 on both the R&B/Hip-Hop and Rap charts. It was Rob's only solo single to reach the Hot 100. Black Rob's verse in the song "By A Stranger", was featured in the in-game radio station "Game Radio" from Grand Theft Auto III.Despite subsequently appearing on releases by P. Diddy and G. Dep, he did not make another hit single. His second album, The Black Rob Report (2005) failed to perform as strongly as his debut and quickly fell off the Billboard 100 charts. In 2005, Jemal Mosley from Off The Block Entertainment started managing Black Rob's career. In 2010, he parted from Bad Boy and signed to independent label Duck Down Records. In 2011, he released Game Tested, Streets Approved, which peaked at number 44 on the Billboard Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums. Black Rob also started his own independent label, Box in One, with Jemal Mosley.In 2013, he joined the reality series Come Back Kings with Ed Lover, Calvin Richardson, David "Davinch" Chance (of Ruff Endz), Jeff Sanders, Jameio, Mr. Cheeks and Horace Brown. In 2014, he appeared on the song "Take 'Em Off Da Map" on Diamond D's album, The Diam Piece. In 2015, Black Rob released his fourth studio album, Genuine Article on Slimstyle Records, which he produced with Jemal Mosley. Guest emcees include Sean Price, Tek, battle legend Murda Mook, and Quas Amill. Ron Browz, former Bad Boy label-mate Q. Parker (112), Kali Ranks, and Quan all sing choruses on the album. Producers include Easy Mo Bee, Coptic, Big French, and others.


== Legal issues ==
Black Rob was sentenced to over seven years in prison in 2006 after failing to appear in court for his sentencing (which was set to be two-to-six years initially) on a charge of grand larceny from 2004, in which he pleaded guilty to criminal possession of more than US$6,000 worth of jewelry stolen in a hotel. He was released from prison in May 2010, and was interviewed by BET two hours later.


== Later life and death ==
Towards the end of his life, Black Rob struggled with homelessness and health issues. A GoFundMe page was created to help him "find a home" and "pay for medical help". Over his last five years of life, he suffered four strokes. On April 17, 2021, Black Rob died of cardiac arrest at age 52.


== Discography ==

Studio albumsLife Story (2000)
The Black Rob Report (2005)
Game Tested, Streets Approved (2011)
Genuine Article (2015)


== References ==


== External links ==
Black Rob on TwitterTarik Luqmaan Trotter (born October 3, 1973), better known as Black Thought, is an American rapper, singer, actor and the lead MC of the Philadelphia-based hip hop group the Roots, which he co-founded with drummer Questlove (Ahmir Thompson). Regarded as "one of the most skilled, incisive, and prolific rappers of his time", he is widely lauded for his live performance skills, continuous multisyllabic rhyme schemes, complex lyricism, double entendres, and politically aware lyrics. With the Roots, he is a singer and rapper on The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon, frequently playing games with Fallon and his guests.


== Early life ==
Black Thought was born Tarik Luqmaan Trotter, to Thomas and Cassandra Trotter, both members of the Nation of Islam. His father was murdered when Trotter was one year old, and his mother was murdered when he was in high school. He spent time tagging "DT" or "Double T" with graffiti around Philadelphia. He sold crack cocaine briefly, and was sent to live with family in Detroit for a few months in high school. Trotter attended the Philadelphia High School for Creative and Performing Arts and Millersville University, studying journalism. In 1987, he became friends with drummer Ahmir "Questlove" Thompson and formed a drummer/MC duo, performing on the streets of Philadelphia and at talent shows. Trotter subsequently spent some time as one of two MCs in the group the Square Roots; the other was Malik B., whom Tariq met in college. In high school, Black Thought became interested in the lessons of the Nation of Gods and Earths.


== The Roots ==
The Square Roots renamed themselves the Roots and released their debut album Organix in 1993. The Roots signed to DGC and followed up with Do You Want More?!!!??! in 1995. Recorded without any sampling, the album was more popular among alternative music fans than those of hip hop. Around the release of the album, the Roots performed at the Lollapalooza alternative music festival and Montreux Jazz Festival. Illadelph Halflife, the band's 1996 album, became its first to chart within the top 40 spots on the Billboard 200 because of the successful single "What They Do". Things Fall Apart followed in 1999, the year the band played at the Woodstock 99 concert.In 2000, the Roots won the Grammy Award for Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group for "You Got Me", with guest performances by Erykah Badu and Eve. Things Fall Apart was nominated for Best Rap Album. For Jay-Z's acoustic concert for the television program MTV Unplugged, the Roots provided instrumentals. Succeeding albums were Phrenology (2002), The Tipping Point (2004), Game Theory (2006), Rising Down (2008), How I Got Over (2010), Undun (2011), and …And Then You Shoot Your Cousin (2014).


== Solo music career ==
Black Thought recorded a solo album, titled Masterpiece Theatre and intended for a 2001 release, but the project was scrapped after he learned that the album would not count toward the Roots' contractual commitments. Most of the songs from the project ultimately appeared on Phrenology. In a June 2008 interview with Brian Kayser of the website HipHopGame, Black Thought spoke of another solo project that was scheduled for release on the Razor and Tie music corporation. He said that Questlove might work on production. However, by September 2014, Black Thought and the solo album were not referenced on the Razor & Tie website.Black Thought's first release outside of The Roots was the 2011 mixtape The Prestige, which he released alongside 10.Deep and the Money Making Jam Collective, the latter of which included longtime Roots collaborators such as Dice Raw, S.T.S., P.O.R.N., and Truck North. In 2013, he stated his intention to follow the mixtape with an album titled Talented Mr. Trotter. However, Black Thought's next release would instead be the EP Streams of Thought, Vol. 1, a June 2018 collaboration with producer 9th Wonder. That November, Black Thought and Salaam Remi released a follow-up EP, Streams of Thought, Vol. 2. The third installment in the "Streams of Thought" series, Streams of Thought, Vol. 3: Cane & Able, was a full studio album released in 2020. The album was preceded by the single "Good Morning", which featured Pusha T, Killer Mike, and Swizz Beats; other featured artists on the album include Portugal. The Man, Schoolboy Q and the Last Artful, Dodgr.Black Thought and Danger Mouse had begun work on a collaborative album, originally titled Dangerous Thoughts, in 2006. There was no further news about this album for years, until the artists announced in May 2022 that they would be releasing their collaboration that August. The album, retitled Cheat Codes, was released on August 10, 2022. Cheat Codes included a posthumous appearance from MF Doom; other featured artists included Raekwon, Kid Sister, Joey Badass, Russ, Dylan Cartlidge, Michael Kiwanuka, ASAP Rocky, Run the Jewels, and Conway the Machine.
In February 2016, Black Thought joined forces with Fashawn, Murs, and Del the Funky Homosapien to record a new track called "Rise Up" for the video game Street Fighter V. Capcom released a music video for the song that included appearances by Black Thought and his fellow collaborators.In December 2017, Black Thought appeared on HOT 97 with Funkmaster Flex and performed a 10-minute freestyle over "The Learning (Burn)" instrumental by Mobb Deep. This freestyle went widely viral, trending on Twitter for the next days and hitting millions of views on YouTube.


== Other work ==
Black Thought starred in films such as Bamboozled (2000), and the 2001 films Perfume, Love Rome, and Brooklyn Babylon. He made his stage debut in January 2022, playing Dr. Junius Crookman in the musical Black No More; he also wrote the lyrics and co-wrote the music for the production.In 2013, Black Thought began work on a memoir with journalist and music critic Jeff Chang and filmmaker Maori Karmael Holmes. An autobiography entitled The Upcycled Mind is scheduled to be released on November 14, 2023.Black Thought also executive produced a short film , Ash Land  which is featured in the 2023 Oregon Shakespeare Festival’s Cyberland Short Films collection, about a woman who loses, then finds herself again while living in the mountains of Ashland, a small town in Oregon during the COVID pandemic, where the festival takes place. Ash Land was an official selection in 2021 for the Academy Award–qualifying Pan African Film Festival, the Brooklyn Film Festival, Bronzelens Film Festival, and Martha Vineyard’s African American Film Festival. The film is directed by South African native Shariffa Ali and written by Banna Desta The film ends with a closing fade to black and voice over of Black Thought addressing the “Black Experience” in Oregon with a powerful and final affirmation: “We Black. We in Oregon. Look at us.”


== Legacy ==
Black Thought is "widely recognized as one of the most skilled, incisive, and prolific rappers of his time", according to AllMusic critic Andy Kellman. Henry Adaso of About.com praises him as "a surgeon of emceeing", and he is highly regarded for his multisyllabic rhymes, internal rhymes, flow, breath control, socially conscious lyrics, and live performances. Questlove stated that Black Thought's clarity and logic also distinguishes him from other emcees, and Stephen Kearse of Pitchfork notes that his "ability to use words as textures as much as tools has always been a hallmark of his style". In the book How to Rap, emcee Kool G Rap described seeing the Roots perform his song "Men at Work" at a show; "I never really liked to perform it that much—because your breath control gotta be crazy. But somebody sent me a clip of the Roots ... and [Black Thought] did all three fucking verses and I couldn't believe it—he killed that shit". Black Thought has influenced several hip hop artists, including Logic, Joey Badass, Rapsody, k-os, and Shad.


== Personal life ==
Black Thought and his wife Michelle were married in 2010. He has four sons and a daughter.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===


=== Extended plays ===


=== With The Roots ===
Organix (1993)
Do You Want More?!!!??! (1995)
Illadelph Halflife (1996)
Things Fall Apart (1999)
Phrenology (2002)
The Tipping Point (2004)
Game Theory (2006)
Rising Down (2008)
How I Got Over (2010)
Undun (2011)
...And Then You Shoot Your Cousin (2014)


=== Guest appearances ===


== Filmography ==
Bamboozled (2000)
Brooklyn Babylon (2001)
Perfume (2001)
Brown Sugar (2002)
Love Rome (2004)
Explicit IIIs (2008)
Night Catches Us (2010)
On the Inside (2011)
Yelling to the Sky (2011)
Get On Up (2014)
Stealing Cars (2015)
The Deuce (2017)
Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt  (2018)
Don't Go Tellin' Your Momma  (2021)
Tick, Tick... Boom! (2021)


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Coleman, Brian (2007). Check the Technique. Random House. ISBN 978-0-8129-7775-2.
Edwards, Paul (2009). How to Rap. Chicago Review Press. ISBN 978-1-55652-816-3.


== External links ==
Black Thought at IMDb
The Roots official site
Black Thought discographyMalik Deshawn Cox (born June 23, 1978), known by his stage name Memphis Bleek, is an American rapper from New York. He first became known for his affiliation with fellow New York rapper Jay-Z, with Cox often being described as his hype man and protégé. Cox signed to his Roc-A-Fella Records label imprint in the late 1990s and released four major label studio albums: Coming of Age (1999), The Understanding (2000), M.A.D.E. (2003), and 534 (2005). He has since founded his own labels: Get Low Records in 1998, and Warehouse Music Group in 2016, with the latter signing rapper Casanova.


== Early life ==
Memphis Bleek was born in Brooklyn, New York City. He grew up in the Marcy Projects, located in the Bedford–Stuyvesant neighborhood of Brooklyn, the same neighborhood as Jay-Z.


== Music career ==
Memphis Bleek was one of the first artists signed to Roc-A-Fella, as a "protégé" of Jay-Z. The name "Memphis", which the rapper explained paid homage to pimps, was a backronym for "Making Easy Money, Pimping Hoes In Style" and "Bleek" was a childhood nickname stemming from his younger sister trying to pronounce his first name, Malik. Bleek's first official appearance was on "Coming of Age" from Jay-Z's Reasonable Doubt (1996), followed by an appearance on "Can I Live II", released on the reissued version of the album. He appeared on subsequent Jay-Z albums: Vol. 2... Hard Knock Life (1997), Vol. 3… Life and Times of S. Carter (1998), The Dynasty: Roc La Familia (2000), and The Blueprint 2: The Gift & The Curse (2002). After the widescale success of Vol 2… Hard Knock Life, the label released Bleek's debut album, Coming of Age (1999). The album was the week's Hot Shot Debut on the Billboard 200, peaking at number 7 with 118,000 units sold in its first week. Bleek launched his own label, Get Low Records in 1998.
Thereafter, he released three follow-up albums for the label: The Understanding (2000), M.A.D.E. (2003), and 534 (2005). Coming of Age and The Understanding were both certified gold by the RIAA. In between the release of The Understanding and M.A.D.E., he took a three-year hiatus, in which he took care of his older brother, who was seriously injured in a motorcycle accident. 534 was named after the building number of the housing project in which he and Jay-Z grew up, and became the first release from the "new" Roc-A-Fella, referring to Jay-Z becoming the president of Def Jam Recordings prior to its release. A song from the album, titled "Dear Summer", is performed solely by Jay-Z and refers to what he called the time of the year in which he would drop a classic album or single every year for eight straight years, and how he had to metaphorically leave "her" (Summer). "Dear Summer" would mark Jay-Z's first song since beginning his brief "retirement" in late 2003. 534 also contains one of the first recordings by Def Jam labelmate turned international star, Rihanna, who featured on the song "The One".Memphis Bleek's highest charting single was "Is That Yo Chick", featuring Missy Elliott and Jay-Z, which peaked at number 7 on the Hot Rap Singles Billboard chart and number 68 on the Billboard Hot 100. Other charting singles include "It's Alright", which also featured Jay-Z and peaked at number 61.In fall 2005, Memphis Bleek told MTV that he was recording an album called The Process, that he would describe as a make or break album, saying "I want to do an album that's through the roof, I want to do a classic album. I feel that if this album I'm not recording is a classic, I'm not even gonna put it out. I have to do it bigger than anybody has ever done it. I have to make a good record this time, not just talking-junk records." The rapper has worked on the album since 2005, and during that time frame he would release the promotional singles: "Hustla", "Get Ya Money Off" and "Let It Off". As of 2023, the album has yet to be released. Memphis Bleek would eventually leave Roc-A-Fella in 2009, after Jay-Z told him he could run his own company and had the proper distribution deals to do so. That same year, Bleek signed a new deal with Mass Appeal Entertainment.In the summer of 2010, he served as a hype man for Jay-Z on stage during a performance at the Swedish festival Peace&Love.
On April 10, 2012, Memphis Bleek released The Movement, an online mixtape which went on to receive over 125,000 downloads on DatPiff. On June 6, 2012, Memphis Bleek released Kush Vol. 2. On March 21, 2014, he released The Movement 2 as a mixtape for free download.


== Personal life ==
On December 13, 2014, Cox married longtime girlfriend, Ashley Coombs, in an evening ceremony at The Merion in Cinnaminson, New Jersey, in which Jay-Z was in attendance. In July 2018, Cox announced the birth of their first child, a daughter. Cox also has a son, born in June 2002. Cox is the cousin of fellow Brooklyn rapper Sean Price.


== Other ventures ==


=== Warehouse Music Group ===
Getting the approval of Jay-Z in 2015, Memphis Bleek started his own label, as CEO and founder of Warehouse Music Group. The debut release from the label was Memphis Bleek's single "So Different" featuring Manolo Rose, which created a big buzz for the label. On July 28, 2016, Memphis Bleek made the announcement of signing Manolo Rose and Casanova. In 2017, Manolo Rose released "Ball Drop" and "Pink Fur". That same year, Casanova released three big singles: "Don't Run", "Go Best Friend" and "Left, Right" featuring Chris Brown and Fabolous.


=== Films ===
In 2002, Memphis Bleek starred in State Property as "Blizz". That same year, he was also in Paper Soldiers. He's had cameos in Backstage and Fade to Black as well.


=== Video games ===
Memphis Bleek is a playable character in the video game Def Jam: Fight for NY.


== Discography ==

Studio albumsComing of Age (1999)
The Understanding (2000)
M.A.D.E. (2003)
534 (2005)


== References ==


== External links ==

Memphis Bleek on MyspaceTony Simon (born October 8, 1976), better known by his stage name Blockhead, and formerly known as Funky Omelet, is an American hip hop record producer and DJ from Manhattan, New York. Aside from his solo efforts released on the Ninja Tune label, he is most associated with producing tracks for Aesop Rock. He has been a member of the groups such as Party Fun Action Committee and The Mighty Jones.


== Biography ==
Simon was born and raised in Downtown Manhattan. He is the son of the late Sidney Simon, a well-known sculptor in New York City, and Renee Adriance, a social worker. He has one brother and five half siblings. At a young age, he loved hip hop in both the lyrical and musical aspects. In his early teens, Simon and his friends formed a group called the Overground, where he started making music. As an aspiring rapper, he enrolled in Boston University and encountered Aesop Rock, another BU student. At this point, Simon quit rapping and focused on producing music. According to him, his stage name comes from the shape of his head: "While it's not square, it's pretty close."


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===
Music by Cavelight (2004)
Downtown Science (2005)
Uncle Tony's Coloring Book (2007)
The Music Scene (2009)
Interludes After Midnight (2012)
Capture the Sun (2013) (with Illogic)
Bells and Whistles (2014)
Justplaywitit (2014) (with Marq Spekt)
Gone Long (2015) (with Joanna Erdos, Jeremy Gibson, Damien Paris, and Bay Li Mckeithan, as The Mighty Jones)
Keep Playin' (2016) (with Marq Spekt)
Funeral Balloons (2017)
The Art of the Sample (2017)
Free Sweatpants (2019)
Bubble Bath (2019)
Space Werewolves Will Be the End of Us All (2021)
Garbology (2021) (with Aesop Rock)


=== Compilation albums ===
Broke Beats (2001)
The Block Is Hot (2004)
Block in the Box (2005)
The Block Is Hot Pt. 2 (2005)
Peanuts in Your Mouth (2007)
Quar and Peace (2020)


=== EPs ===
Preparing for Capture (2012) (with Illogic)
Preparing for Capture 2 (2012) (with Illogic)
After Capture (2013) (with Illogic)
Tiny Bubbles (2020)


=== Singles ===
"Insomniac Olympics" (2003)
"Sunday Seance" / "Jet Son" (2004)
"Expiration Date" (2005)
"Alright" (2006)
"Nobody's Smiling" (2007) (with DJ Signify)


=== Productions ===
Aesop Rock - "1,000 Deaths" from Appleseed (1999)
Aesop Rock - "Commencement at the Obedience Academy", "I'll Be OK", "Basic Cable", "Oxygen", "Spare a Match", "Attention Span", "Drawbridge", and "The Mayor and the Crook" from Float (2000)
Aesop Rock - "Daylight", "Save Yourself", "Flashflood", "No Regrets", "The Tugboat Complex Pt. 3", "Bent Life", "The Yes and the Y'All", "9-5ers Anthem", and "Shovel" from Labor Days (2001)
Aesop Rock - "Daylight", "Night Light", "Forest Crunk", and "Maintenance" from Daylight (2002)
Lodeck - "I Pollute" from Bash It (2002)
Murs - "Happy Pillz" from The End of the Beginning (2002)
S.A. Smash - "Love to Fuck" from Smashy Trashy (2003)
Aesop Rock - "Cook It Up", "Babies with Guns", and "11:35" from Bazooka Tooth (2003)
Lodeck - "Applause", "Feed Me Grapes", and "Beautiful Disease" from Dream Dentistry (2003)
Vordul Mega - "Struggles" from The Revolution of Yung Havoks (2004)
Cryptic One - "Apocalypse Zone", "Unicycle", "Bicycle", and "Tricycle" from The Anti-Mobius Strip Theory (2004)
Cage - "Too Heavy for Cherubs", "Stripes", and "Scenster" from Hell's Winter (2005)
Illogic - "An Ocean" from Write to Death (2005)
Aesop Rock - "Fast Cars", "Number Nine", and "Holy Smokes" from Fast Cars, Danger, Fire and Knives (2005)
Despot - "Crxp Artists" and "Substance D" (2006)
Aesop Rock - "None Shall Pass", "Bring Back Pluto", "Fumes", "Getaway Car", "The Harbor Is Yours", "No City", and "Coffee" from None Shall Pass (2007)
Hangar 18 - "The West Wing" and "Room to Breathe" from Sweep the Leg (2007)
Isaiah Toothtaker - "Winds Know Better" and "Tucson AZ" from Murs 3:16 Presents (2008)
DJ Signify - "Costume Kids" and "1993" from Of Cities (2009)
Open Mike Eagle - "Billy's Quagmire" from Extended Nightmares Getdown: The Dark Blue Door (2011)
Armand Hammer - "The Press" from Half Measures (2013)
Billy Woods - Dour Candy (2013)
Aesop Rock - "Cat Food" (2014)
Armand Hammer - "F.U.B.U." from Furtive Movements (2014)
Aesop Rock & Homeboy Sandman - "Environmental Studies" from Lice (2015)
Billy Woods - "Bicycles", "True Stories", and "Good Night" from Today, I Wrote Nothing (2015)
Marq Spekt - "Still Right In" from Bionic Jazz (2016)
Googie - "Big Mouth Arcade" and "Googie Architecture" (2016)
Billy Woods - Known Unknowns (2017)
Billy Woods - "That Was Then", "Birdsong", and "Suzerain" from Terror Management (2019)


=== Remixes ===
The Majesticons - "Suburb Party (Blockhead Remix)" (2003)
Her Space Holiday - "Meet the Pressure (Blockhead Remix)" from The Young Machines Remixed (2004)
Cool Calm Pete - "Lost (Blockhead Remix)" (2005)
Omega One - "Off the Horizon (Blockhead Remix)" from Memento (2006)
Lodeck - "Na Lubom Yazike (Blockhead Remix)" and "Demon Strait (Blockhead Remix)" from Behold (2007)
Del the Funkee Homosapien - "Foot Down (Blockhead Remix)" (2008)
Yameen - "Fire (Blockhead Remix)" from Never Knows More (2009)
Nacho Picasso - "Benjamin Segal (Blockhead Remix)" from For the Glory (2011)
Emancipator - "Nevergreen (Blockhead Remix)" from Remixes (2011)
DJ Cam - "Love (Blockhead Remix)" from Remixed (2013)
The Difference Machine - "A Night in the Life of the Day Tripper (Blockhead Remix)" from Triangle Schemes (2017)
Anomie Belle - "Right Way (Blockhead Remix)" from Flux (2018)
Aesop Rock - "Pigs (Blockhead Remix)" from The Recycling Bin (2022)
Aesop Rock - "Defender (Blockhead Remix)" from The Recycling Bin (2022)
Aesop Rock - "Kodokushi (Blockhead Remix)" from The Recycling Bin (2022)


== References ==


== External links ==

Blockhead at AllMusic
Blockhead discography at DiscogsAriyan Arslani (born December 2, 1983), professionally known as Action Bronson, is an American rapper, songwriter, chef, wrestler, and television presenter. Born and raised in Queens, New York, he released  his debut mixtape Bon Appetit ..... Bitch!!!!!  in January 2011 and independently released his debut album, Dr. Lecter, in March 2011. In August 2012, Arslani signed his first major-label deal with Warner Bros. Records, but was later moved to the Atlantic Records-distributed label Vice Records.
Arslani went on to create two self-released mixtapes, Rare Chandeliers (2012) with American music producer, Daniel Alan Maman, better known as The Alchemist, and Blue Chips 2 (2013) with longtime producer Party Supplies, before releasing his major-label debut, an extended play (EP) titled Saaab Stories, with frequent collaborator Harry Fraud, in 2013. He released his major-label debut album, Mr. Wonderful, in March 2015, debuting at number seven on the US Billboard 200 chart, receiving over 48,000 streams that week.
Aside from his career in music, Arslani hosted The Untitled Action Bronson Show, a talk/variety show, and still hosts his travel program Fuck, That's Delicious, on Viceland. His frequent collaborators and lifelong friends Meyhem Lauren, The Alchemist, and Big Body Bes are regulars on both of his television series. Renowned chefs such as Mario Batali, Andrew Zimmern, Daniel Boulud, Rick Bayless, Grant Achatz, and others have been guests on his television series. In September 2017, Arslani published a cookbook  based on his travel show,  also titled Fuck, That's Delicious.


== Biography ==


=== 1983–2010: Early life and career ===
Ariyan Arslani was born in Flushing, Queens, New York City, on December 2, 1983, to an Albanian Muslim father and an American Jewish mother. Growing up he had been raised in his father's Muslim tradition. He attended Bayside High School, in Bayside, Queens, and graduated in 2002. Before embarking on a career as a rapper, which was originally just a hobby, Bronson worked as a cook at his father's Mediterranean restaurant in Forest Hills. He hosted his own online cooking show, Action in the Kitchen. After breaking his leg in the kitchen, Bronson concentrated solely on rapping.


=== 2011: Dr. Lecter and Well Done ===
Action Bronson's debut studio album Dr. Lecter was independently released by Fine Fabric Delegates on March 15, 2011. The album, produced entirely by New York City-based music producer Tommy Mas, was made available for digital download and also in CD-R, on his official website. In November of that year, Bronson followed up with Well-Done, a collaborative effort with American hip hop producer Statik Selektah. On March 12, 2012, he released his second mixtape, titled Blue Chips, with Party Supplies.


=== 2012–2013: Major-label deal and Saaab Stories ===
In August 2012, it was announced Paul Rosenberg signed Action Bronson to a management deal with Goliath Artists, which also houses names such as Eminem, The Alchemist, Blink-182 and Danny Brown. In the same month, Bronson was featured on Odd Future-rapper Domo Genesis and American hip hop producer The Alchemist's collaborative album No Idols, on tracks "Elimination Chamber" (featuring Earl Sweatshirt and Vince Staples) and "Daily News" (featuring SpaceGhostPurrp and Earl Sweatshirt). Later that year Action Bronson joined both Warner Bros. Records, via media company VICE, and concert booking agency NUE. On November 15, 2012, Bronson released Rare Chandeliers, a collaborative mixtape with the Alchemist.
In March 2013, Bronson performed at the Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival and later that month was featured on XXL Magazine's 2013 Freshman Class, a list of up-and-coming rappers. In May 2013, Action Bronson was moved to Atlantic Records, and subsequently released an extended play (EP) titled Saaab Stories, on June 11, 2013. The EP was produced entirely by American music producer Harry Fraud and features guest appearances from fellow American rappers Raekwon, Wiz Khalifa, and Prodigy. Released as a digital download only, the EP was preceded by the single, "Strictly 4 My Jeeps". In July 2013, he indicated wanting to get fellow Queens-bred rappers, Nas and Kool G Rap, on his major-label debut album, but unfortunately couldn't get them on. Also in July, Bronson announced his major-label debut album would be released in early 2014.On November 1, 2013, Bronson released Blue Chips 2, the second installment in his Blue Chips series, in promotion of the album. On October 28, 2013, Funkmaster Flex announced he would be hosting an upcoming Action Bronson mixtape. Production was revealed to be coming from Erick Sermon, Mike Will Made It, DJ Mustard and Jahlil Beats. In a November 2013 interview with Rolling Stone, Bronson stated that he would have Kool G Rap and Mobb Deep, featured on his upcoming album.


=== 2014–present: Mr. Wonderful and various studio albums ===
In February 2014, Action Bronson, J. Cole, Kendrick Lamar and 360 accompanied rapper Eminem, on a brief tour of Australia, South Africa and New Zealand. On May 6, 2014, Action Bronson debuted a food-oriented web series, titled Fuck, That's Delicious. The show is a Vice Records-sponsored monthly web series that chronicles the food-obsessed rapper's exploration of all things culinary.On August 5, 2014, Bronson released the song "Easy Rider" as the first single from his debut album Mr. Wonderful. The song was produced by Bronson's longtime producer Party Supplies. On August 20, 2014, the music video for "Easy Rider", was released. The video for "Easy Rider", which was directed by Tom Gould, pays homage to the 1969 Peter Fonda and Dennis Hopper film of the same name. Bronson officially released "Actin Crazy", via digital distribution on January 20. He released the full album on March 23, 2015.In October 2015, Bronson was hospitalized in Anchorage, Alaska, for emergency surgery after a concert on October 23. He remained in the hospital for several days.On Monday May 16, 2016, he presented at the Webby Awards.On August 25, 2017, he released his third studio album, Blue Chips 7000, which serves as a sequel to his 2013 Blue Chips 2 mixtape.
On October 31, 2018, Bronson announced that he was parting ways with Vice, the media company that served as his record label and television network.In November 2018, Bronson announced a tour in support of his latest album, White Bronco. The tour ran from February 2019 to March 2019. Meyhem Lauren and Roc Marciano will be supporting.On August 9, 2020, Bronson revealed the title of his new album, Only for Dolphins, released on September 25, 2020. The cover art was painted by Bronson himself. Bronson described the album as "ANOTHER BRIGHT THREAD WOVEN INTO THE TEXTURE OF THE COSMOS".Bronson released his sixth solo studio album, Cocodrillo Turbo, on April 29, 2022.


== Television and film ==
Action Bronson starred in two television shows which aired on the Viceland channel: the food travel show Fuck, That's Delicious, and a nightly food talk show, The Untitled Action Bronson Show. He also starred in the now-canceled comedy documentary series Traveling the Stars: Action Bronson and Friends Watch 'Ancient Aliens'.
He has had cameo roles in the films The Irishman (2019), playing a coffin salesman, and The King of Staten Island (2020). Bronson also made an appearance for AEW's All Out on September 4, 2022, and wrestled his first professional wrestling match at Grand Slam, teaming with Hook to defeat Matt Menard and Angelo Parker which aired on September 23, 2022.


== Controversy ==
In March 2016, the Program Board of the George Washington University announced that Bronson would be the headlining performer for the university's yearly spring concert, "Spring Fling". Controversy soon erupted as Bronson's song "Consensual Rape" came to light, as well as statements Bronson made that were considered homophobic, transphobic, and misogynistic. Student activist groups successfully pushed for the university to cancel the performance. In April 2016, Bronson was similarly disinvited from the Trinity College Spring Weekend concert.Bronson responded in an open letter, claiming that his songs "depict a story" and "aren't meant to be anything but an artistic expression," condemned all forms of sexual violence, and offered an apology.


== Musical style ==


=== Influences ===
Action Bronson cites fellow American rappers Kool G Rap, Nas, Cam'ron, Mobb Deep, UGK and the Wu-Tang Clan, as major influences. Other artists include Michael Jackson, Carlos Santana, Queen as well as Albanian wedding singers.


=== Rapping style ===
Bronson frequently raps about food in his songs. He is also well known for his frequent, and often obscure, allusions to athletes and sports teams. Bronson's lyrics often make reference to sports in New York City but also touch on more obscure subjects such as professional wrestlers, bodybuilders, figure skating and sports betting.Early in his career, Bronson gained recognition for lyrically and stylistically resembling fellow New York rapper Ghostface Killah of Wu-Tang Clan (with whom he collaborated, along with friend and fellow rapper Termanology, on a song called "Meteor Hammer", from the 2011 compilation album Legendary Weapons). Ghostface Killah himself has admitted to confusing Bronson's rapping for his own. In a 2011 interview with HipHopDX, Bronson was asked about how it was to be compared to the Wu-Tang rapper, and he responded with,

Yeah, I mean at the end of the day, it's all good because Ghostface Killah is one of the best rappers alive, so if I sound similar to the best rapper alive then that is fine. To me there is no comparison; he is a legend and I am a newcomer. If I would try and emulate with anyone it would be Kool G Rap, he is the person I look up to the most. I am not upset but at the end of the day I am my own person and no one can take that away from me.


== Personal life ==
Bronson has two children with a former girlfriend. Bronson's current girlfriend gave birth to a son in November 2019.In mid-2020, prompted by having reached a body weight of 400 pounds (180 kg), and having a myriad of associated health problems, as well as by the birth of his son, Bronson began a regimen of healthier eating as well as boxing and high-intensity interval training. As of December 2020 he had lost 127 pounds (58 kg). He took up Brazilian jiu-jitsu in 2021, training under Ryron Gracie.


== Discography ==

Dr. Lecter (2011)
Well-Done (2011) (with Statik Selektah)
Mr. Wonderful (2015)
Blue Chips 7000 (2017)
White Bronco (2018)
Only for Dolphins (2020)
Cocodrillo Turbo (2022)


== Awards and nominations ==


=== BET Hip Hop Awards ===
The BET Hip Hop Awards was established in 2006 by the network to celebrate hip-hop performers, producers and music video directors.


== See also ==
List of hip-hop musicians
List of people from Queens
Music of New York City


== References ==


== External links ==
Official websiteRobert "Bob" Khaleel, better known by his stage name Bronx Style Bob, is an American rapper from the Bronx, New York City.


== Early life ==
Bob was raised in a strict Arab-Jamaican immigrant household and was exposed to the work of poets such as Langston Hughes and Khalil Gibran.
Bob started out in the Bronx, New York City, at a time when urban culture disciplines such as graffiti, breakin', electric boogie, DJing, scratching and cutting the record, and the MCs rhyming were found.
He attended John F. Kennedy High School with b-boy superstars Crazy Legs and Mr. Freeze of the Rock Steady Crew, Fastbreak (from Magnificent Force), DJ Kid Capri, and Glidemaster & Chino (New York City Breakers).


== Career ==
From 1982 to 1985, Bob was the president of the Bronx Style Crew; influenced by growing up around 170 Street/Jerome Avenue, a few blocks from Disco Fever, and around the corner from the Ecstasy Garage, two famous nightclubs.
In the early '80s, he was a fixture on the Manhattan scene of clubs and art galleries where punk rock, hip hop and graffiti artists came together. From clubs like Danceteria, The Roxy, Peppermint Lounge, Negril, and the Mudd Club to the Fun Gallery. "I ran around with graffiti artists...you would have Andy Warhol Truman Capote Barishnikov in a room with Basqiat Futura 2000 Dondi or Zephyr, with rock steady breakin. Jazzy Jay on the set, and taggers hitting up, blunts flowin', and some graffiti artist gettin' stomped out in the corner by a rival crew...it was like a painting," he said.
His first song as a member of Afrika Bambaataa's Universal Zulu Nation and taking the name "Bronx Style Bob", was in 1985 for the soundtrack to the movie New York Ninja, and in 1986, he embarked on his first tour as a member of the Magnificent Force breakdance crew.
Upon returning to the US, Bob recorded a series of singles for Spring Posse Records with the group the Zulu Kings, which consisted of Grandmaster Melle Mel from the Furious Five, Ice-T, Grand Master Caz of the Cold Crush Brothers, Africa Izlam, Chief Rocker Busy Bee, and Microphone King Donald-D. As a group they would also score the first hip hop animation series Street Frogs, produced by Steve Rifkind for S.R.C Records.
When he relocated to Paris in 1987, he partnered with French rapper Dee Nasty on the alternative radio program Radio Nova. He went to record three songs with Dee Nasty for his first major label release Pousse Les Bass on Polydor Records.
Upon his return to the US in 1989, Bob recorded and tour with Ice-T and the Rhyme Syndicate for much of 1990–91. They embarked on the "Bring Tha Noiz" world tour, which featured Public Enemy, Eric B. & Rakim, EPMD, Big Daddy Kane, N.W.A, MC Hammer, Ice-T and The Rhyme Syndicate, Vanilla Ice, and Tone Lōc.
In 1992, Bob performed on the second stage at the Jones Beach Lollapalooza concert.In Los Angeles, in between tour dates with The Syndicate, he became a founding member of Los Angeles funk collective Trulio Disgracias, featuring members of Fishbone, Red Hot Chili Peppers, The Brand New Heavies, Parliament, Funkadelic, Thelonious Monster, Suicidal Tendencies, and The Untouchables.
Bob later signed with Hollywood Records and formed Super 8, an alternative rock band.
After two years of nonstop touring, Bob began recording with longtime collaborator John O'Brien.
Later, Bob created a new professional identity, "Khaleel", and his new album People Watching, produced by Matt Wallace (The Replacements, Sheryl Crow, Maroon 5, Faith No More), featured guest artists such as members of Fishbone, Spearhead, Jellyfish, Jason Falkner, and Lyle Workman. "No Mercy", the album's first single, became a staple at pop radio, and Bob toured with Shawn Mullins and Everlast.
Bob appeared as a guest vocalist on Everlast's "What It's Like" and "Ends" on his 1998 album Whitey Ford Sings the Blues, as well as on 2000's Eat at Whitey's. He contributed to the John Lennon tribute album Working Class Hero.
In 2002, Bob collaborated with songwriter Brendan Lynch to a new band, Contact.


== Partial discography ==


=== Solo ===
1992: Grandma's Ghost (as Bronx Style Bob)
1999: People Watching (as Khaleel)


=== with Heming Borthne, Joel Shearer, John O'Brien, John Steward ===
1996: Super 8


=== Guest appearances ===
1989: "Puss N' Boots / These Boots (Are Made for Walking)" by Kon Kan from Move To Move
1989: "What Ya Wanna Do?" by Ice-T, Everlast and Donald D from Iceberg/Freedom Of Speech...Just Watch What You Say
1991: "Boulevard Of Broken Dreams" by Donald D from Let The Horns Blow
1992: "Just Another Day" by Electric Love Hogs from Electric Love Hogs
1998: "Ends" & "Today (Watch Me Shine)" by Everlast from Whitey Ford Sings The Blues
1999: "MC DDT" & "Unsaid" by DDT from Urban Observer
2000: "One Planet People" & "Shakey Ground" by Fishbone from The Psychotic Friends Nuttwerx
2006: "We Just Lose Our Minds" by Fishbone from Still Stuck In Your Throat


== References ==


== External links ==
Bronx Style Bob at Discogs
Bronx Style Bob at AllMusicInga DeCarlo Fung Marchand (born September 6, 1978), better known by her stage name Foxy Brown, is an American rapper. Upon signing to Def Jam Recordings in 1996, she released her debut album, Ill Na Na in November of that year. The album was met with critical and commercial success, becoming certified platinum by the RIAA and selling over 7 million units worldwide. The following year, she was placed in the hip hop supergroup the Firm along with Nas, AZ and Cormega (who was later replaced by Nature). The Firm's sole album (1997) was released through Dr. Dre's Aftermath Entertainment. In 1999, Marchand released her second album Chyna Doll to continued success, debuting atop the Billboard 200 and making her the second female rapper to do so after Lauryn Hill in 1998.
Her third album Broken Silence (2001), saw a slight commercial decline and contained the Grammy Award-nominated track "Na Na Be Like". In 2003, she left Def Jam and canceled the release of her next album, Ill Na Na 2: The Fever, but returned in 2005 once frequent collaborator Jay-Z, the label's then-president, signed her again to begin work on another ultimately-shelved album titled Black Roses. Following years of legal issues and a lack of output, Marchand released the mixtape Brooklyn Don Diva in 2008. Her long-delayed visual album King Soon Come, was slated for release in 2019 but has been delayed indefinitely.


== Early life ==
Marchand is a Trinidadian-American of Dougla (mixed Afro-Trinidadian and Indo-Trinidadian) and Chinese-Trinidadian descent. She and her two older brothers grew up in Park Slope, a middle-class neighborhood in Brooklyn. Her parents divorced when she was four, and her family  moved in with her maternal grandfather. She later attended  Brooklyn College Academy.


== Career ==


=== 1994–1996: Early career ===
While still a teenager, Brown won a talent contest in the Park Slope neighborhood of Brooklyn, New York. Members of the production team Trackmasters who were working on LL Cool J's Mr. Smith album were in attendance that night and were impressed enough to invite Brown to rap on "I Shot Ya." She followed this debut with appearances on several RIAA platinum and gold singles from other artists, including remixes of songs "You're Makin' Me High" by Toni Braxton. Brown was also featured on the soundtrack to the 1996 film The Nutty Professor, on the songs "Touch Me, Tease Me" by Case and "Ain't No Nigga" by Jay-Z. She became an instant sensation due to being very talented and rapping provocatively at such a young age. The immediate success led to a label bidding war at the beginning of 1996, and in March, Def Jam Records won and added the then 17-year-old rapper to their roster.


=== 1996–1997: Ill Na Na and The Firm ===
In 1996, Brown released her debut album Ill Na Na to strong sales. The album sold over 128,000 copies in the first week, and debuted at No. 7 on the Billboard 200 album charts. The album was heavily produced by Trackmasters, and featured guest appearances from Jay-Z, Blackstreet, Method Man, and Kid Capri. The album was platinum and launched two hit singles: "Get Me Home" (featuring Blackstreet) and "I'll Be" (featuring Jay-Z).Following the release of Ill Na Na, Brown joined fellow New York-based hip hop artists, Nas, AZ, and Cormega (later replaced by Nature) to form the supergroup known as The Firm. The album was released via Aftermath Records and was produced and recorded by the collective team of Dr. Dre, the Trackmasters, and Steve "Commissioner" Stoute, then of Violator Entertainment. An early form of The Firm appeared on "Affirmative Action" from Nas' second album It Was Written. A remix of the song and several group freestyles were on the album Nas, Foxy Brown, AZ, and Nature Present The Firm: The Album. The album entered the Billboard 200 album chart at No. 1.In March 1997, she joined the spring break festivities hosted by MTV in Panama City, Florida, among other performers including rapper Snoop Dogg, pop group The Spice Girls, and rock band Stone Temple Pilots. Later, she joined the Smokin' Grooves tour hosted by the House of Blues with the headlining rap group Cypress Hill, along with other performers like Erykah Badu, The Roots, OutKast, and The Pharcyde, the tour set to begin in Boston, Massachusetts, in the summer of 1997. However, after missing several dates in the tour, she left it.


=== 1998–1999: Chyna Doll ===
Chyna Doll was released in January 1999 and debuted at No. 1 on the Billboard 200 Album chart, selling 173,000 copies in its opening week, making her the second female rapper to accomplish this feat after Lauryn Hill. However, its sales quickly declined in later weeks. Chyna Doll has been certified platinum after surpassing one million copies sold in shipments.


=== 2000–2003: Broken Silence and Ill Na Na 2: The Fever ===
In 2001, Brown released Broken Silence. The single  "BK Anthem" showcased Brown's "street" image and giving a tribute to her hometown, Brooklyn, and to famous rappers such as The Notorious B.I.G. and Jay-Z. The first single from the album was "Oh Yeah", which featured her then-boyfriend, Jamaican dancehall artist Spragga Benz. The track "Na Na Be Like" was produced by Kenya Fame Flames Miller and Nokio from Dru Hill. The song "Candy", which featured guest vocals from Kelis, was never officially released as a single, but was hugely successful on the radio; it managed to chart at 48 on the R&B/Hip-Hop Singles & Track Chart and number 10 on the Rap charts". Na Na Be Like" was also on the Blue Streak Soundtrack.
The album debuted on the Billboard Charts at No. 5, selling 130,000 units its first week. Like previous albums, Broken Silence also sold over 500,000 records and was certified gold by the RIAA.
In the same year, Brown recorded a song for the action-comedy film Rush Hour 2, Blow My Whistle, which is a collaboration with Japanese-American singer-songwriter Hikaru Utada, and was written by Utada herself alongside Pharrell Williams and Chad Hugo. The song is included on Def Jam's Rush Hour 2 Soundtrack, which peaked the 11th spot on both the Billboard 200 and the Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums and also the first on the Top Soundtracks. "Blow My Whistle" was produced by The Neptunes.In 2002, Brown returned to the music scene with her single "Stylin'", whose remix featured rappers Birdman, her brother Gavin, Loon, and N.O.R.E. It was to be the first single from her upcoming album Ill Na Na 2: The Fever. The next year, she was featured on DJ Kayslay's single "Too Much for Me" from his Street Sweeper's Volume One Mixtape. She also appeared on Luther Vandross' final studio album Dance with My Father. That April, Brown appeared on popular New York radio DJ Wendy Williams' radio show, and revealed the details of her relationships with Lyor Cohen, president of Def Jam Recordings at the time, and Sean "P. Diddy" Combs. Brown accused both of illegally trading her recording masters. She also announced that Cohen had cancelled promotion for her fourth album Ill Na Na 2: The Fever over personal disagreements. Therefore, "Stylin'" was released on the compilation album The Source Presents: Hip Hop Hits Vol. 6.


=== 2004–2008: Black Roses and Brooklyn's Don Diva ===
Upon leaving Def Jam Recordings after her disappointment in the cancelled promotion of her studio album, Ill Na Na 2: The Fever, Brown began recording in late 2004. Months later, she reunited with Jay-Z, performing dates on the Best of Both Worlds Tour. After signing back to Def Jam under his regime, Brown and Jay-Z began work on Black Roses with production by The Neptunes, Kanye West, Timbaland, Trackmasters, and Dave Kelly. Brown confirmed guest appearances by Barrington Levy, Dido, Luther Vandross, Mos Def, Baby Cham, Spragga Benz, Shyne, Big Daddy Kane, Rakim, KRS-One, Roxanne Shante, and Jay-Z, although it was uncertain whether all would make the final cut for the album.In November 2004, Brown announced that the title for her upcoming album would be Black Roses, explaining, "My best friend Barrington Levy has a song called "Black Roses." He's been traveling all over the world and never seen a black rose in no other garden. When he found his black rose, he knew that shit was special. Y'all niggas can have all the female rappers in the world, but there's only one black rose. I feel that's me." Brown also announced that she would be the first artist signed to Jay-Z's upcoming imprint record label S. Carter Records. Rather than launching the imprint, though, Jay-Z became the new president and CEO of Def Jam Records, where he signed Brown as one of the first artists on his new roster. On December 8, 2005, Brown announced she had experienced severe and sudden hearing loss in both ears and she had not heard another person's voice in six months. Brown put Black Roses aside during this time. In June 2006, Brown said her hearing had been restored through surgery and she was planning to resume recording. Her label did not set a release date, but hoped the album would be out by the end of 2006. They were unsure if the title Black Roses would be kept. In November 2006, there was speculation that Jay-Z was disappointed in Foxy Brown's "lack of productivity on the album" and was planning to drop her from the Def Jam label. The planned December 2006 release of Black Roses was cancelled.On May 22, 2007, Black Hand Entertainment announced a management deal with Brown, with Chaz Williams as her manager. No release date was set for Black Roses, but Brown said the album was nearly complete. Two days later, a release date of September 6 was announced. On August 16, Black Hand Entertainment announced that Brown would leave Def Jam to launch an independent record label, Black Rose Entertainment, distributed by Koch Records. A street album, Brooklyn's Don Diva, was eventually scheduled with a release date of December 4, but was delayed until the following year.Brooklyn's Don Diva was ultimately released as a street album on May 13, 2008, after many delays triggered by her prison sentence. It contains two previously unreleased songs from her shelved album Ill Na Na 2: The Fever. The album peaked at No. 83 on the Billboard 200 chart, No. 8 on the Independent Albums chart, and No. 5 on the Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums chart.


=== 2009–2018: Other ventures ===
In January 2011, Brown released the diss track "Massacre", a response to Lil' Kim's "Black Friday". On August 14, 2012, Foxy appeared as a special featured guest on Nicki Minaj's Pink Friday Tour in New York City. Rapper AZ later hinted in an interview that Brown was working on new material with Minaj. In August 2018, Brown made her first official guest appearance since 2009 on "Coco Chanel" from Nicki Minaj's fourth studio album Queen.


=== 2019–present: Upcoming fourth studio album ===
According to media sources, Brown is back to work on her upcoming fourth studio album. In 2019, Brown remixed Casanova's "So Brooklyn".In August 2020, Brown reunited with her group The Firm for the song "Full Circle" from Nas' album King's Disease.


== Artistry ==


=== Musical style ===
Brown's lyrics have been described to be "raunchy" and "over-the-top" with "skimpy clothes to match." Her music is often centred around themes such as "fashion, sex, and the mafia" and is described as "intriguingly seductive" and having "a contemporary edge with a sleek and sexy soundscape." Her work for her debut album was described as "a heroine straight from the pages of a James Bond novel," selling over a million copies with the support of major male artists such as Nas and AZ. Brown's voice has been described as a "husky flow" with "dancehall swagger".Although her work was compared to rapper Lil' Kim, Highsnobiety writer David Opie said that,

Just because they were both the 'First Ladies' of their respective crews, doesn't mean that Foxy or Kim were identical by any means, and it was hugely misogynistic to suggest otherwise [...] In an industry that still actively mocks vulnerability and weakness, hip hop needs more rappers who are willing to open up in this way, and the fact that Foxy did so such a long time ago speaks volumes about her artistry.


== Impact ==
Brown's impact on the rap world has often been overlooked due to her legal run-ins, but it has been noted that "she's bright, talented, sexy and, most important, she's not afraid to take risks creatively" and that her "impact still stands." Her albums have been cited to harness "a winning formula of looping R&B songs into hip-hop hits, resulting in the genre-shifting record," Ill Na Na. The release of her album marked a monumental moment in hip-hop history, but was downplayed due to comparisons between her and rapper, Lil' Kim and although Foxy may not have achieved the "iconic status" Kim had reached, "her debut album was an essential part of a turning point in mainstream rap music." Rolling Stone author, Kathy Iandoli stated,

In seeing Foxy ... release [Ill Na Na] it was a reassurance that skills paid off; it didn't really matter who was helping with the rhymes. It was the delivery and the content that was being said, and whose mouth it was coming out of. It was just a reassurance to me as a hip-hop head that this space might be opening up for women in a way that has never been done before. There was something about what [she] said and how [she was] saying it, that was hinting that a huge change was about to come.
Cited as a fashion icon, Elle writer Janelle Harris wrote that Brown celebrated "the beauty of her mahogany skin as the self-professed 'dark-skinned Christian Dior poster girl,' boasted about being 'dripped in Gabbana [...] starring in billboards as big as the pride of the Black girls who saw themselves in her likeness."Described as one of the "illest to ever do it – regardless of gender," Scott Glaysher of HipHopDX noted that "If those aforementioned male rappers epitomize the menacing New York City mobster of the late 90s then Foxy represents the mob wife that is even more sinister with weaponized sexuality." He stated that "the sheer confidence and astute rhyming Foxy brought to Ill Na Na, makes it one of the 90s most memorable albums and a catalyst for the fierce feminine rap wave that followed. In 2020, Spin ranked her at 20, as one of the 30 Best Female Rappers Ever.Brown's sophomore studio album Chyna Doll debuted at number one in 1999, making it only the second female rap album to debut at the top spot after The Miseducation of Lauryn Hill in 1998 by Lauryn Hill and eventually joined by Let There Be Eve...Ruff Ryders' First Lady in 1999 by Eve, Pink Friday: Roman Reloaded in 2012 by Nicki Minaj and Invasion of Privacy in 2018 by Cardi B. Her work has been paid homage to by numerous artists including, Nicki Minaj, Kash Doll, Bia, Ivorian Doll, Megan Thee Stallion and Maliibu Miitch. Minaj has even gone so far to say that without Foxy she "may have never even started rapping" and that she is "the most influential female rapper."


== Personal life ==
From 1997 to 1999, she was engaged to fellow rapper, Kurupt. In 2000, she announced that she was suffering from depression. She subsequently entered drug rehabilitation at Cornell University Medical College to receive treatment for opioid addiction, stating that she could no longer record or perform without resorting to morphine. Around 2001, she was engaged to Spragga Benz. Her uncle, Federico de la Asuncion, was one of 265 fatalities in the crash of American Airlines Flight 587 on November 12, 2001.Brown suffered hearing loss from May 2005 to June 2006. She opted for a hearing aid, and, while recording music, had someone tap beats on her shoulder.In 2013, Brown denied reports claiming that she had made disparaging remarks about Jay-Z. In an interview with Combat Jack, she stated: "He never said not one bad thing about me. So when that false story came out about me talking about him, it's like, why would I say those things about him?"On January 13, 2017, she gave birth to her first child, a girl.Comparisons between Brown and Lil Kim led to fierce competition. "Things got really personal when shots were fired outside a New York radio station." The two have not resolved the issue, with Foxy siding and collaborating with rapper Nicki Minaj in her feud with Kim in recent years. Following her release from prison, Kim does not acknowledge Brown. Brown, on the other hand, has consistently targeted Kim on a prime basis in her music and concerts since Kim's release.


== Legal issues ==
Brown has a substantial history of assault and menacing.
On September 7, 2007, New York City Criminal Court Judge Melissa Jackson sentenced Brown to one year in jail for violating her probation that stemmed from a fight in 2004 with two manicurists in a New York City nail salon. On September 12, representatives of the rapper disputed claims by her lawyer that she was pregnant. On October 23, 2007, Brown was given 76 days in solitary confinement due to a physical altercation that took place on October 3, with another prisoner. According to the prison authorities, Brown, the next day after the incident, was also verbally abusive toward correction officers and refused to take a random drug test. Prison authorities reported on November 27 that she was released "from solitary confinement...for good behavior", and Brown was finally released from prison on April 18, 2008.On July 22, 2010, Brown was arrested and charged with one count of criminal contempt, which is a class E felony (the least severe), for violating an order of protection. The charge stems from an incident during the evening of July 21, 2010, in which it was claimed that Brown swore at, then mooned her neighbor Arlene Raymond, at whom she had thrown her BlackBerry, in 2007. Following the BlackBerry incident, Raymond sought and received a restraining order against Brown. Following her arrest, Brown appeared in court where she pleaded "not guilty" to the charge and was released on a $5,000 bail. If convicted, she faced up to seven years' imprisonment. On July 12, 2011, the charges were dropped.


== Discography ==

Studio albumsIll Na Na (1996)
Chyna Doll (1999)
Broken Silence (2001)Collaboration albumsThe Album with The Firm (1997)


== Tours ==


=== Headlined ===
Ill Na Na Tour (1997–1998)
Chyna Doll Tour (1999)


=== Co-headlined ===
Smokin' Grooves Tour (1997)
No Way Out Tour (1997)
Get Up On A Room (1999)
Out4Fame Germany Tour (2015)


=== Appearances ===
Reasonable Doubt Tour (1996)
Survival of the Illest (1998)
The Black Album Tour (2003)
Best of Both Worlds (2004)
Pink Friday Tour (2012)


== Filmography ==


== Awards and nominations ==


== Notes ==


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Hope, Clover (2021). The Motherlode: 100+ Women Who Made Hip-Hop. Harry N. Abrams. ISBN 978-1-4197-4296-5.


== External links ==

Foxy Brown (rapper) at Curlie
Foxy Brown on ReverbNationThomas Lee Brown (born May 1, 1986), also known as TBHits, is an American record producer, songwriter and rapper. Brown currently lives in LA and was born and raised in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. He is an ASCAP award winner and a Grammy nominee. He has scored multiple chart topping albums while working with Ariana Grande on all six of her studio albums. Brown has also collected production credits for three songs on Grammy-award-winning artist Meghan Trainor's second album, Thank You (2016).
Brown learned from production greats Roy "Royalty" Hamilton and Rodney Jerkins, while working alongside them and eventually creating a team of his own.


== Producing and songwriting ==
Before working in music, Brown worked at Sears in Atlanta, Georgia. Every night, he would hand out around 50 CDs with his songs on them and snippets of The Notorious B.I.G.'s "Ten Crack Commandments" over the tracks. He was finally contacted by Gorilla Zoe who invited Brown to work in the studio with him. Originally, starting in 2008, Brown worked with production group Darkchild in his early career. During this time, he worked with artists such as Jennifer Lopez, Wyclef Jean. He has also worked with The Black Eyed Peas, most notably their song "Just Can't Get Enough". In 2012, Brown became independent with publishing through Sony/ATV Music Publishing. He lives in Los Angeles, producing tracks for established stars and new acts like Meek Mill, Travis Scott, Cee Lo Green, Nas, T.I., Ariana Grande, John Legend, Teyana Taylor, Cyhi the Prynce, Victoria Monét, Mario, Chrisette Michele, Kelly Rowland, Twice and 2 Chainz.


== Discography ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official websiteRondell Edwin Turner (born December 6, 1982), better known by his stage name Ron Browz (), is an American recording artist and record producer from Harlem, New York. He initially gained major recognition after producing the Jay-Z diss track, "Ether" by Nas. Due to the notoriety of the song, Browz adopted the nickname "Ether Boy". In 2008, he began recording music as a rapper, utilizing the Auto-Tune effect and subsequently released two popular singles, "Pop Champagne" and "Jumping (Out the Window)". He also founded his own record label imprint, Ether Boy Records.


== Career ==


=== 1998–2007: Producing for hip hop artists ===
Ron Browz began producing records for Harlem-based rapper Big L. He later gained an album placement with Nas' critically acclaimed song "Ether", which was used at that time to diss fellow rapper Jay-Z.


=== 2008–2010: Venture as a recording artist ===
In late 2008 Ron Browz started working on his solo album Etherboy after receiving a deal from Universal Motown. The first single was "Pop Champagne", a collaboration with fellow Harlem rapper Jim Jones featuring Juelz Santana. "Pop Champagne" was included in Jones's 2009 album Pray IV Reign. The second single was "Jumping (Out the Window)"; the music video was released on January 27, 2009. He was featured on Busta Rhymes' first single "Arab Money" off his album Back on My B.S. and Capone-N-Noreaga's comeback single "Rotate" off their album Channel 10. By 2009, Browz had gained fame on the Internet due to the use of his third single, "Gimme 20 Dollars", in memes featuring the Slenderman.
However, his planned Etherboy album was never released, and Browz eventually parted ways with Universal in 2009 due to business disagreements. On December 22, 2009, Browz independently released an extended play entitled Timeless.On July 20, 2010, Browz released his debut album Etherlibrium independently on his founded record label Ether Boy Records.


=== 2011–present: Independent and mixtape circuit ===
In 2011 Browz had been giving fans free downloads of songs from his upcoming double album Random/Awkward. But in late 2011 it was announced by Browz that his next album would not be the double-disc set Random/Awkward. On October 17, 2011, Browz released his mixtape entitled The Christening.On February 14, 2012, Browz released an extended play entitled Fly Away. on August 29, 2012, Browz released another mixtape entitled Stranded On Lenox. On November 23, 2012, Browz released an instrumental mixtape entitled Ron Browz Instrumentals Vol. 1.Browz continued touring the world performing songs from his most recent release Blvck Circus which was released on May 21, 2013. On January 29, 2014, Browz released a sequel to The Christening entitled The Christening 2. On September 2, 2014, Browz released a single entitled "She Don't Like Me".


== Discography ==

Etherlibrium (2010)


== Awards ==
Urban Music Awards

2009, Best Collaboration ft. Jim Jones & Juelz Santana 'Pop Champagne' (Won)


== References ==


== External links ==
Ron Browz at AllMusic
Ron Browz discography at Discogs
Ron Browz discography at MusicBrainz
Ron Browz on TwitterKenyatta Blake (born November 19, 1974), known professionally as Buckshot, is an American rapper from New York, best known as a frontman of hip hop groups Black Moon and Boot Camp Clik. He is a founder of Duck Down Music record label with Drew "Dru-Ha" Friedman. He has released one solo studio album – three with producer 9th Wonder, one with KRS-One, four albums with Black Moon and four albums with the Boot Camp Clik.


== Biography ==
Born and raised in Brooklyn, New York City, Buckshot Shorty began rapping in neighborhood rhyming ciphers. In high school, he befriended Karim "5ft" Reid, Ewart "DJ Evil Dee" Dewgarde and Walter "Mr. Walt" Dewgarde, who would evolve into the super production team Da Beatminerz.
In 1992, Blake, Reid and Ewart Dewgarde formed Black Moon. The trio released the single "Who Got Da Props?" in late 1992, which reached number 86 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart, landing them a recording deal with Nervous Records. Later that year, Black Moon released their first full-length album, Enta da Stage to positive critical acclaim. The album featured appearances by Havoc of Mobb Deep, as well as future Boot Camp Clik members Tek and Steele of Smif N Wessun.
In 1994, with Drew "Dru-Ha" Friedman, the two left Nervous Records and formed Duck Down Management. That same year, Blake signed and oversaw the creation of Smif-N-Wessun's debut album Dah Shinin', as well as adding Heltah Skeltah (Rock and Ruck) and Originoo Gunn Clappaz (Starang Wondah, Top Dog and Louieville Sluggah) to Duck Down's roster. During the summer, Blake took part in the collaboration with Masta Ace and Special Ed as the Crooklyn Dodgers, releasing a single by the same name, on the soundtrack of Spike Lee's 1994 film Crooklyn.
Officially titled Duck Down Entaprizez in 1996, Blake, Friedman and Smif-N-Wessun began work with Tupac Shakur on the unreleased studio album One Nation. During this time Blake was dubbed as "The BDI Thug" by 2Pac.
March 1997 marked a milestone in Duck Down history. The collective of:Buckshot, Smif-N-Wessun,, Heltah Skeltah and O.G.C. formed a supergroup the Boot Camp Clik, who released their debut album titled For the People. A remix of "Night Riders" was recorded featuring Aaliyah, but the single was never released, due to conflicts between record labels.
In 1999 Black Moon released their second album War Zone. It was their first full-length album in more than 5 years. Featuring guest appearances from Q-Tip, Busta Rhymes, M.O.P., Heather B. and produced by Da Beatminerz, the album sold over 200,000 units and was met with strong reviews. Blake's solo album, The BDI Thug, was released later that year but to mediocre reviews.
In July 2002, Duck Down ended its two-year search for a new distribution deal, inking a three-year contract with Koch Distribution. Boot Camp Clik released their second full-length album The Chosen Few. The album sold over 60,000 copies, making it one of Duck Down's most successful releases. In 2004 Black Moon returned with Total Eclipse. The album peaked at #47 on the Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums and ranked #23 for Independent Albums charts.
Blake and North Carolina-based producer 9th Wonder (of Little Brother and Justus League) collaborated to release Chemistry in summer 2005 to positive reviews. This album was a part of Duck Down's 'Triple Threat Campaign', preceded by Sean Price's Monkey Barz and followed by Tek & Steele's Smif 'n' Wessun: Reloaded.
Boot Camp Clik returned in summer 2006 with The Last Stand. With an all-star cast of producers (Pete Rock, Da Beatminerz, 9th Wonder, Large Professor, Marco Polo, Illmind, Coptic, Sic Beats and Ken BB), it was a critical success and marked the return of the entire Boot Camp Clik for the first time in several years. In addition, Black Moon released, Alter The Chemistry, laced with 1970s influenced rhythms and samples it takes a new approach to Chemistry.
In April 2008, Buckshot and 9th Wonder released their sophomore studio album, The Formula. In September same year, Blake was hospitalized after suffering a series of seizures. His business partner, Friedman, said he had just returned from a three-week tour through Europe prior to the episodes. After a short hospitalization, he was released and returned to performing and recording.
Buckshot and KRS-One also released an album together called Survival Skills on September 15, 2009, via Duck Down Records. Its first single "Robot", produced by Havoc, was released on iTunes on May 5, 2009.
During 2010s, Blake has released the third album with 9th Wonder, The Solution (2012), Backpack Travels (2014) with DJ P-Money from New Zealand, and the fourth Black Moon album titled Rise of da Moon (2019), which is his recent project to-date.


== Personal life ==
Blake is a Muslim, and his Muslim name is Ḥanīf aṣ-Ṣiddīq حَنيْف الـصِّدِّيْق.  He can also speak Arabic.


== Discography ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Buckshot Biography from Duck Down website
Biography at RapArtists
Brown, Marisa Buckshot Biography", allmusic, Macrovision Corporation
ItsHipHop.tv Video Interview
https://web.archive.org/web/20070929033547/http://www.certifiedhiphop.com/features.shtml    Follow The Leader – Buckshot Interview
Interview @ HoodHype.com
Interview w/ SoundHustle.comAnthony Best (born March 20, 1968) professionally known as Buckwild, is an American hip hop producer. Hailing from The Bronx borough of New York City, he is a member of Diggin' in the Crates Crew, along with Lord Finesse, Showbiz and A.G., Diamond D, Fat Joe, Big L, and O.C. He has produced a number of tracks for prominent rappers in the music industry, including The Notorious B.I.G.'s "I Got a Story to Tell" and Black Rob's "Whoa!". In 2013, he was described by HipHopDX as "one of Hip Hop's most prolific and acclaimed producers".


== Career ==
In 2010, Buckwild released Nineteen Ninety Now, a collaborative album with Celph Titled. In 2014, he released a collaborative album with Meyhem Lauren, titled Silk Pyramids.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===
Nineteen Ninety Now (2010) (with Celph Titled)
Silk Pyramids (2014) (with Meyhem Lauren)
Trafficanté (2019) (with Pounds)
No Expiration Date (2022) (with Artifacts)


=== Compilation albums ===
Buckwild: Diggin' in the Crates (2007)
Nineteen Ninety More (2011) (with Celph Titled)
Music Is My Religion (2020)


=== EPs ===
Still Diggin' Composition EP (1998)
Buckwild Presents... (2010)
Silk Pyramids Extras EP (2014) (with Meyhem Lauren)
Fully Loaded (2020)


=== Productions ===


== 1994 ==
O.C. - "Word...Life", "O-Zone", "Born 2 Live", "Time's Up", "Point O' Viewz", "Let It Slide", "Ma Dukes" and "Outtro (Sabotage)" from Word...Life (1994)
Artifacts - "C'mon Wit Da Git Down", "Attack of New Jeruzalum", "What Goes On" and "C'mon Wit Da Git Down (Remix)" from Between a Rock and a Hard Place (1994)
Organized Konfusion - "Stress", "Thirteen" and "Why" from Stress: The Extinction Agenda (1994)
Beastie Boys - "Get It Together (Buck-Wild Remix)" (1994)
Brand Nubian - "Alladat" from Everything Is Everything (1994)
Big L feat. Kid Capri - "Put It On" from Lifestylez ov da Poor & Dangerous (1994)


== 1995 ==
Big L - "8 Iz Enuff", "Danger Zone" and "Da Graveyard" from Lifestylez ov da Poor & Dangerous (1995)
Little Indian - "One Little Indian" from "One Little Indian VLS" (1995)
AZ - "Ho Happy Jackie" from Doe or Die (1995)
Mic Geronimo - "Masta I.C.", "Three Stories High" and "Train of Thought" from The Natural (1995)
Kool G Rap - "Blowin' Up in the World" and "Fast Life" from 4,5,6 (1995)


== 1996 ==
Mad Skillz - "VA in the House", "Doin' Time in the Cypha" and "Get Your Groove On" from From Where??? (1996)
Sadat X - "The Lump Lump" and "Smoking on the Low" from Wild Cowboys (1996)
Street Smartz - "Problemz" (1996)


== 1997 ==
Capone-N-Noreaga - "Neva Die Alone" and "Black Gangstas" from The War Report (1997)
Organized Konfusion - "Shugah Shorty" and "Invetro" from The Equinox (1997)
Diamond D - "On Stage" from Hatred, Passions and Infidelity (1997)
Mic Geronimo - "How You Been?" from Vendetta (1997)
The Notorious B.I.G. - "I Got a Story to Tell" from Life After Death (1997)
Royal Flush - "I Been Gettin' So Much $", "Niggas Night Out" and "Makin' Moves" from Ghetto Millionaire (1997)
O.C. - "The Chosen One", "Far from Yours" and "Hypocrite" from Jewelz (1997)
Jay-Z - "Lucky Me" from In My Lifetime, Vol. 1 (1997)


== 1998 ==
Big Pun - "Dream Shatterer" from Still Diggin' Composition (1998)
Brand Nubian - "Brand Nubian" and "Maybe One Day" from Foundation (1998)
Fat Joe - "Walk on By" from Don Cartagena (1998)


== 1999 ==
Akinyele - "Sister, Sister" from Aktapuss (1999)
A.G. - "All Eye Seeing" and "Kurupt Money" from The Dirty Version (1999)
Mase - "Another Story to Tell" from Double Up (1999)
Terror Squad - "Rudeboy Salute" from The Album (1999)
Black Rob - "Whoa!" from Life Story (1999)


== 2000 ==
Big Pun - "Nigga Shit" from Yeeeah Baby (2000)
Beanie Sigel - "What a Thug About" from The Truth (2000)


== 2001 ==
O.C. - "Back to Cali", "Soul to Keep", "Bon Appetit", "Get It Dirty", "Utmost", "Respect da Drop", "Weed & Drinks", "Paradise", "Psalm 23" and "Bonafide"from Bon Appetit (2001)

Faith Evans - "I Love You" from Faithfully (2001)
P. Diddy & The Bad Boy Family - "So Complete" from The Saga Continues... (2001)
Fat Joe - "My Lifestyle" and "Still Real" from Jealous Ones Still Envy (J.O.S.E.) (2001)
Kool G Rap - "The Streets" (2001)
Big L - "How Will I Make It" from Harlem's Finest - A Freestyle History - Volume 2


== 2002 ==
AZ - " I'm Back" and "Rebirth" from Aziatic (2002)
WC - "So Hard" from Ghetto Heisman (2002)
Cormega - "A Thin Line" from The True Meaning (2002)
Fat Joe - "Take a Look at My Life" from Loyalty (2002)
Kool G Rap - "Holla Back" from The Giancana Story (2002)


== 2003 ==
Lumidee - "Only for Your Good" from Almost Famous (2003)
702 - "Better Day (Ghetto Girl)" from Star (2003)


== 2004 ==
Nas - "These Are Our Heroes" from Street's Disciple (2004)
Terror Squad - "Pass Away" from True Story (2004)


== 2005 ==
50 Cent - "I Don't Need 'Em" from The Massacre (2005)
The Game - "Like Father, Like Son" from The Documentary (2005)
Beanie Sigel - "Look at Me Now" from The B. Coming (2005)
I-20 & Playaz Circle - "You Ain't Got Enough" from Disturbing tha Peace (2005)


== 2006 ==
Remy Ma - "She's Gone" from There's Something About Remy: Based on a True Story (2006)


== 2007 ==
Playaz Circle - "U Can Believe It" from Supply & Demand (2007)


== 2008 ==
Termanology - "Respect My Walk" from Politics as Usual (2008)
Immortal Technique - "Stronghold Grip" from The 3rd World (2008)


== 2009 ==
Jadakiss - "Pain & Torture" from The Last Kiss (2009)
Method Man & Redman - "Mrs. International" from Blackout! 2 (2009)
Cormega - "Mega Fresh X" from Born and Raised (2009)


== 2010 ==
Sadat X - "Long Years" from Wild Cowboys II (2010)
Capone-N-Noreaga - "With Me" from The War Report 2: Report the War (2010)


== 2011 ==
Saigon - "Oh Yeah (Our Babies)" from The Greatest Story Never Told (2011)


== 2012 ==
Nas - "You Wouldn't Understand" from Life Is Good (2012)
Maino - "Nino Brown" from The Day After Tomorrow (2012)


== 2013 ==
R.A. the Rugged Man - "Still Diggin Wit Buck (Legends Intro)" and "Media Midgets" from Legends Never Die (2013)
Papoose - "Cure" from The Nacirema Dream (2013)


== 2015 ==
DJ EFN - "Revolutionary Ride Music" from Another Time (2015)
Ea$y Money - "Money & Blood" from The Motive of Nearly Everybody, Yo (2015)


== 2016 ==
Reks - "Jump Shots" from The Greatest X (2016)
Vinnie Paz - "The Void" from The Cornerstone of the Corner Store (2016)
Termanology - "I Dream B.I.G." (featuring Sheek Louch and Styles P) from More Politics (2016)


== 2018 ==
Apathy - "A View of Hell (Hell of a View)" from The Widow's Son (2018)


== 2020 ==


=== Buckwild - Fully Loaded (Buckwild album) ===
01. "Oleander (feat. Chuck Strangers)"
02. "Violent Man (feat. Nick Grant)"
03. "YFN (feat. Meyhem Lauren & Raekwon)"
04. "Ease Up (feat. Little Brother)"
05. "Fully Loaded (ft. Rome Streetz and Rim)"
06. "Mad Rich (feat. Madhattan)"
07. "Never Fold (feat. Fly Anakin) "
08. "Real Niggaz (feat. Rasheed Chappell)"
09. "Green Paper (feat. Chris & Whisper)"
10. "More Life (feat. Asun Eastwood)"


== References ==


== External links ==
Buckwild discography at DiscogsJoseph Anthony Budden II (born August 31, 1980) is an American media personality and Grammy Nominated retired rapper. He first gained recognition as a rapper with his 2003 top 40 single "Pump It Up" then as a member of the hip hop supergroup Slaughterhouse. In 2018, he retired from rap, and refound success as a broadcaster, having a much publicized run as a co-host on Everyday Struggle for Complex. He currently hosts State of the Culture on Revolt, and The Joe Budden Podcast, released twice a week on Patreon and YouTube. He has been described as "the Howard Stern of hip-hop".


== Early life ==
Budden was born to Joseph Budden and Fay Southerland on August 31, 1980, in the East Harlem neighborhood of Upper Manhattan, New York City, New York. He moved to Jersey City, New Jersey, at the age of thirteen with his mother and older brother, where he attended Lincoln High School. Budden's father was absent from his life during his childhood, a subject he would later address in his music.Budden was a troubled youth and sent to Laurinburg Institute, a boarding school in North Carolina, where he began to hone his skills as a rapper. After returning to Jersey, he began using drugs, developing an addiction to angel dust. After an emotional confrontation with his mother, Budden voluntarily went into rehab on July 3, 1997, in exchange for him being allowed to attend his senior prom. Budden did not earn his diploma, and fathered a child with an older woman by the age of 20. With his son on the way, Budden began taking music more seriously. In 2001, he teamed up with producer Dub-B, also known as White Boy, and began releasing his first mixtapes and demos, one of which ended up in the hands of Hot 97 radio host and Desert Storm Records label head DJ Clue.


== Career ==


=== Breakthrough, self-titled debut (2002–2003) ===
Budden quickly became a mixtape fixture, and secured a major deal with Def Jam Recordings in 2002. He first gained attention through the promotional single "Focus", which spent seventeen weeks on the US Billboard Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart, peaking at No. 43.On May 8, 2003, Budden released "Pump It Up" as the lead single for his upcoming album. The song, produced by Just Blaze, was a commercial success, charting at No. 16 on the US Billboard Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs, as well as its Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Airplay chart at No. 18. The song peaked at No. 38 on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart, No. 10 on the Hot Rap Songs chart, and No. 39 on the Radio Songs chart. The song was also featured on soundtracks for hit movies like 2 Fast 2 Furious (2003) and You Got Served (2004), as well as the video game Madden NFL 2004. Def Jam Vendetta, Def Jam Fight for NY, & Def Jam Fight for NY: The Takeover where Budden appeared as a playable character. The song received a Grammy Award nomination for the Best Male Rap Solo Performance at the 46th Annual Grammy Awards.
On June 10, 2003, Budden released his eponymous debut studio album Joe Budden. It debuted at No. 8 on the US Billboard 200, selling 95,000 units in its first week, and going on to sell over 420,000 copies in the United States. Its second single, "Fire (Yes, Yes Y'all)", featuring guest vocals by American rapper Busta Rhymes, peaked at No. 18 on the US Billboard Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Airplay chart and No. 48 on the Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart. Budden made a remix featuring Paul Cain and Fabolous, which appeared on the latter's mixtape, titled More Street Dreams, Pt. 2: The Mixtape. In late 2003, Budden featured on the R. Kelly produced song, Clubbin by Marques Houston, which peaked at No. 39 on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 and at No. 15 on the UK BPI charts.


=== Label issues, Mood Muzik series (2003–2008) ===
While on Def Jam, Budden released two mixtapes, Mood Muzik: The Worst of Joe Budden on December 9, 2003, and Mood Muzik 2: Can It Get Any Worse? on December 26, 2005. Both were critically acclaimed with Complex retrospectively naming Mood Muzik 2 as one of the best mixtapes of all time. During this time, his intended second album, The Growth, suffered continuous delays, due to disagreements between Joe and Def Jam executives over the direction of the album. On May 25, 2005, Joe released "Gangsta Party" featuring Nate Dogg as the album's first single. The Growth was eventually shelved and Budden was released from Def Jam.In December 2007, Budden signed a multi-album deal with Amalgam Digital, His first release on the label was Mood Muzik 3: The Album on February 26, 2008, a retailed version of his mixtape Mood Muzik 3: For Better or for Worse, released previously on December 15, 2007. Although it sold poorly, the album received universal acclaim from critics, who praised Budden's willingness to discuss personal issues.


=== Halfway House, Slaughterhouse, Padded Room, Escape Route (2008–2012) ===
On October 28, 2008, Budden released his third studio album, Halfway House, exclusively in digital format. It was the first in a series of connected albums. Its release marked Budden's first return to the Billboard 200 in five years, with approximately 3,000 downloads sold in its first week of release. The album featured "Slaughterhouse", the first collaboration between Budden, Crooked I, Royce da 5'9" and Joell Ortiz. The song's positive reception inspired the four to form a group, naming themselves Slaughterhouse after the song.After an initial delay, Budden's fourth album, Padded Room was released on February 24, 2009, debuting at No. 42 on the US Billboard 200 chart and No. 2 on the Top Independent Albums chart, with 13,451 copies sold in the first week of release. Budden's fifth album, Escape Route, followed on August 11, 2009, and met with positive reception from critics. The same day, Slaughterhouse released their self-titled debut album, Slaughterhouse, through E1. On October 26, 2010, Budden released Mood Muzik 4: A Turn 4 the Worst.
Slaughterhouse planned a second album for release in 2010, tentatively titled No Muzzle. However, Royce da 5'9" confirmed talks between the group and Eminem's Shady Records, and felt their second album should be released on a major label. After some complications with E1 and Amalgam, Slaughterhouse officially signed a deal with Shady Records on January 12, 2011. On February 8, 2011, Slaughterhouse released a self-titled extended play.
On August 28, 2012, Slaughterhouse released their second studio album Welcome to: Our House, which debut at No. 2 on the Billboard 200 and No. 1 on the Billboard Top Rap Albums, selling 52,000 copies its first week. It was preceded by the mixtape, On The House, which was released on August 19, 2012.


=== No Love Lost, All Love Lost, Rage & The Machine (2013–2016) ===
On October 16, 2012, Budden released "She Don't Put It Down", featuring Lil Wayne and Tank. The song was the lead single from his upcoming sixth studio album. It debut at No. 96 on the Billboard Hot 100, marking Budden's first appearance on the chart in nearly ten years since his debut single "Pump It Up".
In January 2013, Budden joined the cast of VH1's Love & Hip Hop: New York in season three. He would return for its fourth season later that year.
On February 5, 2013, Budden released No Love Lost, which debut at No. 15 on the Billboard 200 selling 30,000 copies in its first week. By March 20, 2013, the album had sold 60,000 copies. It was preceded by the mixtape A Loose Quarter, which was released on November 20, 2012. On March 26, 2013, Budden released the album's second single, "N.B.A. (Never Broke Again)", featuring Wiz Khalifa and French Montana.On July 12, 2014, Budden participated in Total Slaughter, a rap battle event opposing Hollow Da Don, a top rap battler and influencer in battle rap. Judges awarded victory to Hollow through unanimous decision.In February 2015, Budden began releasing a weekly podcast with Rory Farrell and Marisa Mendez, then known as I'll Name This Podcast Later. On October 16, 2015, Budden released his seventh studio album, All Love Lost, to universal acclaim from critics. It was preceded by the extended play, Some Love Lost, on November 4, 2014, and the singles "Broke" and "Slaughtermouse".
Budden announced his last solo tour dates on May 16, 2016. On July 2, 2016, Budden released a diss track, "Making A Murderer Part I", primarily aimed at Canadian rapper Drake, although he also takes shots at Meek Mill in the song. He later explained that the diss was not personal, done for the competition and sport, and that he has no gripe with either artist. In the aftermath of the feud, Mendez was replaced on Budden's podcast by Jamil "Mal" Clay, after which the show became known as The Joe Budden Podcast.
On October 21, 2016, Budden released his eighth and final solo album, Rage & The Machine, produced entirely by AraabMUZIK. The album debuted at No. 40 on the Billboard 200, selling 11,341 copies in the United States.


=== Broadcasting career (2017–present) ===
On April 17, 2017, Budden began co-hosting Everyday Struggle, a daily morning show for Complex, with DJ Akademiks and Nadeska Alexis. On June 25, 2017, during the BET Awards pre-show, Budden and his co-hosts conducted an interview with Atlanta rap group Migos, where tensions rose between Budden and Migos member Takeoff after DJ Akademiks questioned his absence on Migos' 2016 hit single Bad and Boujee. Budden walked off set and a momentary standoff occurred between himself and the group. Migos member Quavo referred to Joe Budden in the song "Ice Tray", saying "If a nigga hatin' call him Joe Budden". Budden left the show in December 2017.On May 14, 2018, Budden announced a partnership with Sean Combs and his media company Revolt, creating and producing the talk show State of the Culture, which premiered on September 10, 2018. Budden would co-host with rapper and fellow Love & Hip Hop co-star Remy Ma. During the summer of 2018, The Joe Budden Podcast began touring, with live performances through the United States. During this time, he officially announced that he was retiring from rapping. In August 2018, Budden signed a deal to bring his podcast to Spotify and expand the show to a bi-weekly schedule, with new episodes every Wednesday and Saturday. On August 27, 2020, Budden announced he was leaving Spotify at the end of his contract over a financial disagreement with the streaming service.In November 2018, Budden returned to Love & Hip Hop: New York in season nine. The next year, he returned for the show's tenth anniversary season.
On February 3, 2021, Budden announced that he is bringing exclusive content from his podcast to crowdfunding service Patreon. He also announced that he would be joining Patreon's board as Creator Equity Advisor with the goal to address "everything that's wrong with the monetization system for creators."


== Personal life ==
Budden has two children. His oldest son, Joseph Budden III (often referred to as Trey), was born in 2001. In 2010, a warrant for Budden was issued by the Hudson County, New Jersey Sheriff's Office for unpaid child support. His second son, Lexington, was born on December 15, 2017, to Budden and model and video vixen Cyn Santana. The couple became engaged in December 2018, after Budden proposed during a live episode of The Joe Budden Podcast in New York. The couple has since called off their engagement.
On March 30, 2012, Budden spent a night in jail and missed a Slaughterhouse concert in his home town over a $75 parking ticket.In 2014, Budden turned himself in to police following allegations he assaulted his girlfriend and stole her cell phone, and appeared in Manhattan Criminal Court on charges of assault, grand larceny and robbery. A judge later dismissed all charges against Budden.Budden has admitted to having an addiction to PCP and later MDMA, but has been off drugs and publicly spoken out against their use.


== Discography ==

Studio albumsJoe Budden (2003)
Mood Muzik 3: The Album (2008)
Halfway House (2008)
Padded Room (2009)
Escape Route (2009)
No Love Lost (2013)
All Love Lost (2015)
Rage & The Machine (2016)Collaboration albumsSlaughterhouse (with Slaughterhouse) (2009)
Welcome To: Our House (with Slaughterhouse) (2012)


== Filmography ==


=== Film ===


=== Television ===


=== Video games ===


== References ==


== External links ==
Official websiteDainene Alexia Baldwin (born February 13), best known by her stage name, Dai Burger (/deɪ/) is an American rapper. She is from Queens in New York City. She has released two studio albums to date.


== Early life ==
Baldwin was born and raised in Queens, but has also lived in Brooklyn.


== Career ==
Baldwin's performing career began while working as a backup dancer on tour with Lil Mama. Since that time she has appeared in several music videos, including Beyoncé's "Party", and has worked as a stylist for designer Patricia Field's clothing boutique. She had also toured with Chris Brown and Soulja Boy as a backup dancer.Baldwin launched her music career with her 2010 project MyMixxxytape, hosted by rapper Junglepussy. She explains that her stage name came "out of nowhere, but I like to think that I'm stacked, and juicy." In 2011, Burger released her second compilation Raw Burger featuring Junglepussy on the track "Titty Attack"."In Ya' Mouf" was released via Complex Magazine in January 2014. Featuring production by Shane Augustus and Mighty Mark, the mixtape was well received because of Baldwin's clever lyricism and confident representation of girl power. The video for the single "Soufflé" premiered in Interview magazine and was picked as one of the best feminist music videos of 2013. The release was featured on Solange Knowles' Saint-Heron and contributed to Burger being named "Artist To Watch" by Rolling Stone magazine in April 2014.Gearing up for her next project, Baldwin collaborated with London-based producer Darq E Freaker on the track "Choppin Necks". "Choppin Necks" was hailed by critics as a futuristic dark song, in all the right ways. Burger delivered "jaw-dropping bars", according to James Keith from Complex.On December 4, 2015, Dai Burger premiered her 5-track self-titled project "Dai Burger" exclusively with Dazed magazine.Baldwin performed at the first ever "Sound & Style" event in New York, hosted by Boss Lady and Reebok and was as an opening act for Lil Wayne and 2 chainz in Long Beach, NY in the summer of 2014. To date she has collaborated with artists including Kool Keith, Cakes da Killa, Cazwell and Jonte' Moaning.Her debut studio album, titled Soft Serve, was released on August 24, 2017.Baldwin released her second studio album, Bite the Burger, in 2019. The album released a score of 6.7 from Pitchfork, with the reviewer commenting, "An artist as bold and honest as Dai should never sound so boring."Dai Burger is openly gay. Talking in an interview about her sexuality she stated, "I like queer because it’s an umbrella, more than it identifies one thing. I don’t have to, you know, choose a letter."


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===
Soft Serve (2017)
Bite The Burger (2019)


=== Mixtapes ===
Mymixxxytape (2010)
Raw Burger (2011)
In Ya' Mouf (2014)


=== Extended plays ===
Dai Burger (2015)
Dessert (2020)


== See also ==
LGBT culture in New York City
List of LGBT people from New York City


== References ==Christian Palko (born May 4, 1973), better known by his stage name Cage, is an American rapper from Middletown, New York. With a majority of his career being spent with record labels Definitive Jux and Eastern Conference. He has released six solo albums, in addition to two compilation albums and two EPs.
Aside from his solo career, Cage is one of the founders of the underground hip hop supergroup The Weathermen, which was formed in 1999. He also established a group called Smut Peddlers, with hip hop duo The High & Mighty, publishing an album titled Porn Again, in 2001. He is also known for his collaborations with New Jersey rapper Tame One; the two were collectively known as Leak Bros. Cage and Camu Tao made up the duo Nighthawks, who released an eponymous 2002 album.


== Early life ==
Chris Palko was born in Würzburg, West Germany, to American parents. His father was stationed on a West German military base as a member of the military police.  Palko lived there until the age of four when his father was dishonorably discharged for selling and using heroin, and the family was sent back to the United States, where they lived in Middletown, New York. His father would often force Palko to pull homemade tourniquets around his arm as he injected heroin. At the age of eight, Palko's father was arrested during a standoff with state troopers after threatening his family with a shotgun. By the time Palko was expelled from high school, his mother had remarried twice, and he was beaten by his stepfather Frank. Palko began using PCP, cocaine, LSD, cannabis and alcohol.Palko was arrested several times for drug possession and fighting in the streets. Facing jail time for violating probation, his mother convinced the judge he was mentally unstable, and was sent to the Stony Lodge psychiatric hospital for a two-week evaluation. He stayed in the hospital for sixteen months, where he was a part of a small group used to test fluoxetine, commonly known as Prozac. After being misdiagnosed and placed on the drug, he became suicidal and made several attempts to kill himself, including hanging himself with his shoelaces and saving his lithium dose for a month before ingesting all of them at once.


== Career ==


=== 1991–2001: Career beginnings ===
When Palko was released from the hospital at eighteen, he pursued a career as a rapper, giving himself the stage name "Alex", after the protagonist of Anthony Burgess' novel A Clockwork Orange. After hiring a manager and recording a demo, he was introduced to rapper Pete Nice, and Cage debuted on the track "Rich, Bring 'Em Back" on the 1993 album Dust to Dust. Known as "Keige" and part of a group named Bloody Ruffnecks and later Mudbones, his first demo mixtape was released in 1994; in the liner notes, he named his influences as Kool Keith, Big Daddy Kane, Rakim, Juice Crew, Marley Marl and KRS-One.Pete Nice also introduced Palko to radio personality Bobbito García, who featured Palko on his program several times, increasing his reputation among New York's underground hip hop scene, where he became associated with KMD, Kurious Jorge, K-Solo, Godfather Don, Necro, Artifacts, Pharoahe Monch and El-P. He spent the last night with MF Doom's brother and KMD member Subroc in 1993 before he was killed in a road accident. Palko signed a recording contract with Columbia Records, but frequently recorded while intoxicated, and the label found his efforts to be unsatisfactory. Palko briefly put his career on hold and his drug use increased. He became a father to a daughter in 1994.When García founded the label Fondle 'Em Records, he offered Palko a record deal, and Cage released a single featuring the songs "Radiohead" and "Agent Orange" in 1997, to success and acclaim. Following the release of Slim Shady EP in December 1997, Palko accused Detroit-based rapper Eminem of imitating his style.After several more singles with Fondle 'Em, Palko met Mr. Eon and DJ Mighty Mi of The High & Mighty, and the trio formed the group Smut Peddlers, releasing the album Porn Again on Rawkus Records in 2001. The album peaked at #10 on the Billboard Heatseekers chart, #43 on the Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums chart, and #184 on the Billboard 200, while its single "That Smut" peaked at #9 on the Hot Rap Singles chart and #96 on the Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Singles & Tracks chart. In 2001 and 2002 respectively, Palko's music was featured on the soundtrack to the psychological crime film Bully and season 1 of the crime drama television show The Wire.


=== 2002–2009: Eastern Conference and Definitive Jux era ===
Palko signed with The High & Mighty's Eastern Conference Records, releasing his debut album, Movies for the Blind, on August 6, 2002. It peaked at #12 on the Heatseekers chart, #14 on the Top Independent Albums chart, #58 on the Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums chart, and #193 on the Billboard 200. Palko later stated, in 2006, that the album "sort of glorified drugs" and that he felt the album was "crazy for the sake of being crazy [...] . During this period, Palko formed the group The Weathermen, named after the left-wing political organization. The group released their debut album The Conspiracy on June 3, 2003, before Palko left Eastern Conference over alleged non-payment. An extended play, titled Weatherproof, was released on July 29, 2003. During his time on Eastern Conference, Interscope Records showed interest in signing Cage despite Eminem also being on their label, but ended their interest after judging that he would not attract a mainstream audience.Because Palko felt that he should no longer play a character, he began to take on a more open writing style, and signed with Definitive Jux, where he released his second studio album Hell's Winter, on September 20, 2005. Hell's Winter peaked at #26 on the Top Heatseekers chart and at #36 on the Top Independent Albums chart.In a 2007 interview with American actor Shia LaBeouf, for Vanity Fair, LaBeouf expressed interest in starring as Palko in a possible film biography. On November 30, 2007, Spin reported that the film would go into production.In July 2009, Palko released his third studio album Depart from Me, which he characterized as having a rap rock sound. LaBeouf directed the music video for the song "I Never Knew You". Cage's mental health was affected by the suffering and death of best friend and collaborator Camu Tao during the recording process.


=== 2010–present: Kill the Architect and later work ===
In late 2010, Palko appeared on American recording artist Kid Cudi's second album Man On The Moon II: The Legend of Mr. Rager, making a guest appearance on a track titled "Maniac". The two performed "Maniac", alongside indie rock musician St. Vincent, on Late Night with Jimmy Fallon in November of that year. In March 2011, Cudi announced he would be releasing a short film inspired by the song "Maniac", co-starring Palko and directed by Shia LaBeouf, in October 2011. On October 30, 2011, as promised Cudi released Maniac, a short horror film, premiered via his blog.Despite previously having a falling out with The High & Mighty, Palko announced in 2012, he would reunite with producer DJ Mighty Mi, to release a single titled "The Void", which was released on April 3, 2012, on Tribute Records. Palko also started a new project with Sean Martin, called We Sold Our Souls, who released their first song "Super Baked" in March 2012. Cage also announced he would release material under an alter ego, Sam Hill, with lyrics on topics similar to his early efforts on Movies For the Blind. On August 23, 2013, it was announced that the album Kill the Architect would be released on October 22, 2013, with Eastern Conference. A song from the album, "The Hunt", was released on the same day.Palko had two further supporting roles in independent films: Justin Benson and Aaron Moorhead's critically acclaimed romantic horror Spring and Amber Tamblyn's drama Paint It Black.In 2015, Palko suffered a brain injury in a road accident and was affected by amnesia for two years. He returned to music by touring with the Insane Clown Posse, and released a 2018 album under the Sam Hill alias.


== Style ==
Described by Okayplayer as "One of horrorcore's most polarizing figures", Cage frequently rapped about his traumatic childhood including parental abuse and his year-long spell at the Stoney Lodge mental hospital, calling the latter experience a college education for his rap career. He abandoned this style between Movies for the Blind and Hell's Winter, making a choice to not make misogynistic music, music promoting drug use, or battle rap. Cage used influences from rock music on 2009's Depart from Me, calling it "progressive rap". Cage was also called "the poster boy for emo rap" by Exclaim!, with Hell's Winter and the song "I Never Knew You" cited as examples of him performing in this style.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===
Movies for the Blind (2002)
Hell's Winter (2005)
Depart from Me (2009)
Kill the Architect (2013)
Book ov Sam: Infernal Depths (2018) (as Sam Hill)
Death Miracles (2020)


=== EPs ===
Weatherproof (2003)
I Never Knew You (2009)


=== Collaborative albums ===
Porn Again (2001) (with The High & Mighty, as Smut Peddlers)
Nighthawks (2002) (with Camu Tao, as Nighthawks)
Waterworld (2004) (with Tame One, as Leak Bros)


== Filmography ==
Maniac (2011)
Spring (2014)
Paint It Black (2016)


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Cage at AllMusic
Cage at IMDbCrystal Caines is a Guyanese–American rapper, record producer, artist, songwriter and engineer based in Harlem, New York. She has Produced and been featured on tracks by BIA, Baauer, MIA, Jack Harlow, Bryson Tiller, Ransom, Nick Hook and more.


== Career ==
Crystal Caines is an Artist, Producer and Engineer. She began her production career in 2012. Caines went on to artist develop and produce for ASAP Ferg. In 2013, Caines produced the Bone Thugs-n-Harmony-featuring "Lord" on A$AP Ferg's debut album, Trap Lord, Continuing on to also engineering and premixing vocals for A$AP Ferg's future singles, "Work", "Shabba” and assisted in sonically shaping the majority of the TrapLord Album. Caines draws her inspiration from artists like Eve and producers like No ID.In 2014, she released her debut single and Video, "Whiteline".
Then went on to produce for other artist such as Bia, Ro James, Johnny Cinco, DZA, Abby Jasmine, Jack Harlow, Bryson Tiller, Leeky Bandz and more.


== Discography ==


=== Singles ===
Crystal Caines (featuring A$AP) – "Whiteline" (2014)
Crystal Caines - "No Drama" (2017)
Crystal Caines- "Bossanova" (2017)
Crystal Caines- "IKYLI"
Crystal Caines- "Do That Thing"
Crystal Caimes- “late night”


=== Guest appearances ===
BIA (featuring Crystal Caines) – "Love No more" (2014)
A$AP Ferg - Didn't Wanna Do That
A$AP Ferg (featuring MIA and Crystal Caines) – "Reloaded (Let it Go pt. 2)" (2014)
A$AP Ferg (featuring Crystal Caines and Marty Baller) – "Weaves" (2014)
A$AP Ferg (featuring Mz 007 and Crystal Caines) – "Now" (2014)
Baauer (featuring Crystal Caines) – "Swoopin" (2014)
Nick Hook – 'Going Back 2' Feat. Bodega Bamz, Crystal Caines, DJ Sliink & Nadus (2015)
A$AP Ferg (featuring Skrillex and Crystal Caines) – "Hungry Ham" (2016)
Dave East - "Talk to Big" (2018)
Ransom - “Most Dreadful symphony”


=== Production credits ===
BIA – "Chola season" (2015)
A$AP Ferg – "A Hundred Million Roses" (2012)
A$AP Ferg (featuring Bone Thugs-n-Harmony) – "Lord" (2013)
BIA – "Love No more" (2014)
BIA – "La Tirana" (2014)
BIA – "Weekend in Vegas" (2014)(co-prod Black Jab)
A$AP Ferg (featuring Marty Baller) – "Jungle" (2014)
A$AP Ferg (featuring MIA and Crystal Caines) – "Reloaded (Let it Go pt. 2)" (2014) (co-prod)
Al Doe (featuring Johnny Cinco) - "Lost & Found" (2016)
Smoke Dza - "Rugby" (2016)
Smoke Dza - "Hands of Time" (2016)
Jimi Tents (featuring Ro James) - 2 shots
BBYMUTHA - "Bulma" (co-prod)
Felly - falling (2018)
ABBY JASMINE - front door (2019)
Ro James - freeek (2020) (co-Prod)
Leeky Bandz - Stanky Leg (2021) (co- prod.)
Crystal Caines - "Do That Thing" - Ballers HBO
Shea Moisture - It Comes Naturally (2020)
Marcus Orelias - Spend It Fast, Hustle This Hard, Keep Going (2022)
Thru the night - Jack Harlow, Bryson Tiller (Co-Prod)
Moxie Raia - Stick Like Glue


=== Writing credits ===
Moxie Raia - Stick Like Glue (verses)
Moxie Raia - Good Things (bridge)


== References ==


== External links ==
Crystal Caines on Instagram
crystalcaines on TwitterAnthony “Ace” Patterson (August 15, 1989), also known by his stage name Call Me Ace, is an American rapper from Bridgeport, Connecticut, and currently lives in the San Francisco Bay Area, California. In December 2016, Call Me Ace released his first EP, Misinterpretations while still a business consultant at Deloitte Consulting LLP. In March 2019 he released Airplane Mode, which debuted at #3 on the iTunes Top 40 US Hip-Hop Album Chart and at #50 on the Billboard R&B / Hip-Hop Album Sales Chart.In 2016, Call Me Ace released his first EP, Misinterpretations, solely produced by Bay Area legend producer, Sean T, who has produced for Mac Dre, Mistah F.A.B., and E-40. Misinterpretations ended up being the #9 most-spun album on KUSF radio in February 2017. In August 2017, Call Me Ace released the 2interpretations mixtape, which reached #19 on Thizzler's Bay Area Music Chart that same month (rank of 50). In March 2019 he released his fourth project and first independent studio album, Airplane Mode, which debuted at #50 on the Billboard R&B / Hip-Hop Album Sales Chart. In February 2020, Call Me Ace released his 2nd EP, Working From Home, which reached over 1 million streams on Spotify, despite having recently changed jobs from Facebook to YouTube. In June 2020, he quickly followed up with the EP, Working From Home: Extended - inspired by the COVID-19 global pandemic and recent social unrest - and used his album campaign as a way to fundraise over $10,000 in effort to combat racial injustice towards black and brown communities in the United States.In February 2021, Call Me Ace released his second studio album, Out Of Office, which is his third project created and released during the pandemic. In the same month, Call Me Ace was also recognized in Symphonic Distribution's "20 Black Artists Who Are On The Rise in 2021" list. In April 2021, Call Me Ace reached the Top 10 of BET Music's national emerging talent search competition, BET AmpliFind.


== Early life, education, and career ==
Ace Patterson was born in Bridgeport, Connecticut. His parents emigrated from Jamaica before they had him. Growing up, Ace was interested in drawing, acting, poetry, and, eventually, rapping by the time he finished middle school. He went to Greens Farms Academy for high school and middle schoolIn 2007, Ace enrolled at Columbia University in New York City. In 2009, he co-founded the student group, Columbia University Society of Hip-Hop (CUSH). Before graduating, he and his group CUSH opened up for Snoop Dogg at the annual Bacchanal concert. In 2011, Ace received his Bachelor of Arts in Anthropology.In 2013, Ace was quoted and referenced in a chapter of the Oxford Handbook of Critical Improvisation titled, "Improvisation in Freestyle Rap," written by Ellie Hisama.In 2014, Ace left his role at Success Academy Charter Schools to attend graduate school at the University of California, Berkeley, Haas School of Business. During his last semester, he and a classmate made a parody of Drake's “The Motto” in honor of the school and called it, “YOHO (You Only Haas Once)”. The music video was featured on Poets & Quants the day of release and has over 10,000 views to date. In 2016, Ace received his Master of Business Administration and joined Deloitte Consulting.Ace worked in Marketing at Facebook and is part of the 2019 class of ADCOLOR FUTURES, a nationally selective program that celebrates diverse influencers that excel in their careers and also give back to the community. Currently, Ace works on the Creator & Artist Development team at YouTube as the Global Program Manager for Music Label Partnerships.


== Musical influences ==
Call Me Ace has noted Ludacris, Lil Wayne, Snoop Dogg, Busta Rhymes, and Eminem as rappers that inspired him when he was younger. Ace has eclectic music tastes, having referenced genres like Cuban music, Blues, Jazz, Dancehall, Afrobeats, and Ethiopian music as being additional sources of inspiration. His music style is influenced by his Jamaican roots, the East Coast, the Bay Area, and his international travel experiences. Call Me Ace has stated that he and his wife have visited over 100 international cities across 50 countries, are both multilingual, and are both children of immigrants - all of which have given him a global, cross-cultural outlook on life and in his music.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===


=== Extended plays ===


=== Mixtapes ===


== References ==


== External links ==

Official Website
Call Me Ace on InstagramCameron Ezike Giles (born February 4, 1976), better known by his stage name Cam'ron, is an American rapper. Beginning his career in the mid-1990s as Killa Cam, Giles signed to Lance "Un" Rivera's Untertainment, an imprint of Epic Records and released his first two studio albums Confessions of Fire (1998) and S.D.E. (Sports Drugs & Entertainment) (2000), the former earned gold certification by the RIAA. After leaving Epic, Giles signed to Roc-A-Fella Records in 2001 to release his third studio album Come Home with Me the following year. It received platinum certification by the RIAA and contained his highest-charting singles to date: "Oh Boy" (featuring Juelz Santana) and "Hey Ma" (featuring Juelz Santana, Freekey Zeekey and Toya), which peaked at No. 4 and No. 3 respectively on the Billboard Hot 100. His fourth studio album, Purple Haze was released in 2004 to continued success, earning gold certification by the RIAA.
After Giles and his label Diplomat Records parted ways with Roc-A-Fella in 2005 due to disagreements between himself and label-head Jay-Z, Giles signed the label to a distribution deal with Asylum Records. In 2006, Giles released his fifth studio album Killa Season, which accompanied a film of the same name, in which Giles made his director-screenwriter debut and starred in the film. In 2009, after taking a hiatus due to his mother's health, Giles returned to music and released his sixth studio album Crime Pays in 2009, reaching number 3 on the Billboard 200. A decade later, he released his seventh album Purple Haze 2.
Aside from his solo career, Giles was first a member of the short-lived hip hop group Children of the Corn, which he formed alongside Big L and Mase in 1993 before disbanding in 1997. He subsequently formed the hip hop collective the Diplomats (also known as Dipset) the same year, alongside his longtime affiliate Jim Jones and cousin Freekey Zekey. He later performed as one half of the duo U.N. (Us Now) with fellow Harlem native Vado; the duo released two collaborative projects. Giles has occasionally worked as an actor, starring in the Roc-A-Fella films Paper Soldiers and Paid in Full in 2002.


== Biography ==


=== 1976–1997: Early life and career beginnings ===
Giles was born and raised in the East Harlem neighborhood of Upper Manhattan, New York City. He was raised by his mother, Fredericka Giles (July 10, 1955 – February 9, 2023). He went to school at the Manhattan Center for Science and Mathematics, where he met his longtime friends Mase and Jim Jones. He was a promising basketball player alongside Mase; however, he was unable to take advantage of scholarship offers due to his poor academic standing. Instead, he enrolled in a college in Texas, without even graduating from high school, but soon dropped out and returned to Harlem where he began selling drugs before starting his rap career. Giles was eventually introduced to The Notorious B.I.G. through his childhood friend Mase. B.I.G. introduced Giles to Lance Rivera, who signed him to his label, Untertainment.He began his musical career in the mid-1990s, rapping alongside Big L, Mase, and his cousin Bloodshed, in a group called Children of the Corn. After Bloodshed's death in a car accident on March 2, 1997, the group disbanded and the remaining members pursued solo careers.


=== 1998–2002: Confessions of Fire, S.D.E. and Come Home with Me ===
Two years before Big L's murder in 1999, Cam'ron was introduced to The Notorious B.I.G. by Mase who was signed to Bad Boy Records at the time. Biggie was so impressed by Cam'ron that he introduced him to his partner Lance "Un" Rivera who signed Cam'ron to his Untertainment label, distributed by Epic Records. His debut album, Confessions of Fire, was released a year later in July 1998 and included singles such as "3-5-7" (which was also featured in the movie Woo), and "Horse and Carriage" featuring Mase, which reached the R&B Top Ten. The album achieved gold status and made the Top 10 of both the pop and R&B charts.
In 2000, Cam'ron was working with music executive Tommy Mottola and released his second album S.D.E. (Sports Drugs & Entertainment) on Sony/Epic Records. With features from Destiny's Child, Juelz Santana, Jim Jones, N.O.R.E., and producer Digga, it included the relatively successful singles, "Let Me Know" and "What Means The World To You". The album reached Number 2 on the R&B/Hip-Hop Albums chart, and Number 14 on the Billboard 200.
After demanding a release from Sony/Epic Records, Cam'ron signed with his childhood friend and new manager Damon Dash to Roc-A-Fella Records in 2001, alongside artists such as Jay-Z, Beanie Sigel, Freeway and Memphis Bleek. A reported $4.5 million record deal was agreed upon with and Damon Dash and his Roc-A-Fella partners Kareem Biggs and Jay-Z in the form of a record advance. His third and most successful album Come Home with Me was released in 2002 featuring guests such as Jay-Z, Beanie Sigel, and Memphis Bleek, and production from Just Blaze, Kanye West and The Heatmakerz. It included the hit singles "Oh Boy" and "Hey Ma", which both featured the Diplomats newest member Juelz Santana. The album achieved platinum status and served as a stepping stone for Cam'ron's group the Diplomats to sign with Roc-A-Fella.In 2002, Cam'ron went on to appear in the Damon Dash produced film, Paid in Full, in which he played one of three main characters alongside Mekhi Phifer and Wood Harris. In 2006 he started shooting his movie for his album titled Killa Season; the film would mark both Cam'ron's screenwriting and directorial debuts, as well as his return to acting. Killa Season was released to DVD on April 25, 2006, after a special two-day theatrical release.


=== 2003–2009: Purple Haze, Killa Season and Crime Pays ===
In March 2003, Cam'ron teamed up with his fellow Diplomats Members Jim Jones, Juelz Santana, and Freekey Zeeky to release the Diplomats' debut double disc album, Diplomatic Immunity, under Roc-A-Fella/Diplomat Records, which was quickly certified gold by the RIAA. The album featured the lead single "Dipset Anthem", a remix to Cam'rons hit "Hey Ma", and the (street anthem) single "I Really Mean It", as well as featuring production from Kanye West, Just Blaze, and The Heatmakerz. A year later, the Diplomats released their second album, Diplomatic Immunity 2.
On December 7, 2004, Cam'ron's fourth studio album, Purple Haze, was released on Def Jam/Roc-A-Fella Records. It featured collaborations with Kanye West, Jaheim, Twista, Juelz Santana, and various other artists and ultimately reached gold status. The album was also a critical success, being ranked 114th on Pitchfork Media's Top 200 Albums of the first decade of the 21st century List, and 10th on Rhapsody's Hip Hop's Best Albums Of The Decade List. However, after feeling that the album was poorly promoted and that his projects were not receiving enough attention, Cam'ron requested his release from Roc-A-Fella Records.
On April 28, 2005, Cam'ron officially joined the Warner Music Group under the Asylum Records imprint. He began work on what would be his first project for the new label. Cam'ron's fifth studio album, titled Killa Season, was released on May 16, 2006, featuring production from long-term collaborators The Heatmakerz, Charlmagne and Ty Fyffe, as well as others such as Alchemist and I.N.F.O. Along with the album, Cam'ron released his first film, in which he wrote, directed and starred in, also titled "Killa Season". Despite selling 112,000 units in the first week and debuting at number 2 on the charts, Killa Season failed to have the same sales strength as his two previous releases, but Killa Season became certified gold.
After the release of Killa Season and his feud with 50 Cent in 2007, Cam'ron took a three-year hiatus from music after his mother suffered three strokes which left her paralyzed on her left side. He moved to Florida with her to set up her rehabilitation and therapy, and stayed there until she had fully recovered. Cam'ron's 2009 album, Crime Pays was released on Asylum/Diplomat Records, featuring the majority of the production handled by Skitzo and AraabMuzik. Although none of the singles from the album managed to chart, the album still reached number 3 on the Billboard 200 but only sold 150,000 units, making it the lowest selling album of his career. In 2009 Cam'ron formed a new label, Dipset West and new group the U.N.


=== 2010–present: Mixtapes, EPs and collaborations ===
In late 2009–early 2010, Cam'ron released a series of mixtapes hosted by DJ Drama called Boss of All Boses which featured his new upcoming artist Vado. Cam'ron also released a collaboration album with his new group the U.N. which included himself and fellow Harlem rapper Vado titled Heat in Here Vol. 1; the first single off the album was "Speaking Tongues" which peaked at No. 82 on the U.S. R&B charts. Cam'ron announced that he would be releasing a joint album with rapper Vado called Gunz n' Butta; on April 19, 2011, the album was released on E1 Music. In 2013, Vado signed with We the Best Music Group after his personal friendship with Cam'ron eroded, although Vado maintained at the time that they still worked on a business level and had no animosity towards him. After three years Cam'ron and Jim Jones decided to mend their differences and start working together again for the third installment of the Diplomatic Immunity album along with fellow Diplomat members Juelz Santana and Freekey Zekey. Cam'ron announced that The Diplomat album's release would take place around Christmas 2010. The first promotional single featuring the reunited Diplomat members was titled "Salute"; it was produced by AraabMuzik and would later appear on Jim Jones album Capo.
In 2012 Cam'ron was featured on rapper/singer Wiz Khalifa's second studio album O.N.I.F.C. on a song titled "The Bluff". Also In 2012 Cam'ron would be featured on rapper/singer Nicki Minaj's second studio album Pink Friday: Roman Reloaded on a song titled "I Am Your Leader" along with rapper Rick Ross.
In 2013 during an interview Cam'ron discussed his seventh upcoming studio album Killa Season 2 stating that it will feature guest appearances from Dipset, T.I., Nicki Minaj, and Wiz Khalifa. On October 1, 2013, Cam'ron released his promotional mixtape for the album titled Ghetto Heaven Vol 1.In January 2014, according to Complex Magazine, Cam'ron and A-Trak were to team up for a collaborative EP to be titled Federal Reserve which would be executive-produced by Dame Dash and have featured appearances by Juelz Santana and Jim Jones. In May, they put out the first single from the album, titled "Dipsh*ts", featuring commentary from Dame Dash and Juelz Santana on the hook and an accompanying official video. On February 11, 2014, Cam'ron along with fashion designer Mark McNairy revealed their "Cape line" during New York fashion week. On October 20, 2014, via his Instagram Cam'ron revealed and released his "Ebola mask" stating on the caption "Ebola is no joking matter, so if u have to be safe, be fashionable". Cam'ron also has a fashion clothing line titled "Dipset USA" which is branded off his former label Diplomat Records. On July 1, 2014, Cam'ron released his 1st of the Month, Vol. 1 EP. On August 1, 2014, Cam'ron released his 1st of the Month, Vol. 2 EP, it included the single "So Bad" featuring Nicki Minaj. On September 1, 2014, Cam'ron released his 1st of the Month, Vol. 3 EP. On October 1, 2014, Cam'ron released his 1st of the Month, Vol. 4 EP. On November 1, 2014, Cam'ron released his 1st of the Month, Vol. 5 EP. On December 1, 2014, Cam'ron released his 1st of the Month, Vol. 6 EP. On December 11, 2014, Cam'ron announced that his next studio album will not be a sequel to his fifth album Killa Season but will be a sequel to his critically acclaimed fourth studio album Purple Haze titled Purple Haze 2; Cam'ron also announced that this would be his final album. On December 16, 2014, Cam'ron would release his compilation 1st of the Month: Box Set (Deluxe Edition).On January 1, 2015, well known DJ Funkmaster Flex announced via his Instagram that he had spoken to fellow Diplomat members Cam'ron, Jim Jones and Juelz Santana about an upcoming Diplomat's mixtape which included fellow member Freekey Zeekey. He also confirmed and stated that he will be hosting the mixtape along with DJ's/Rappers/Producers DJ Khaled, Swizz Beatz and DJ Mustard.In July 2016, he announced that he will release an album called Killa Pink and he promoted his line of signature the Reebok Flea 2's, and announced that the shoe will be released in combination with the album.


== Other ventures ==


=== Directing and acting ===
In 2002, Cam'ron went on to appear in the Damon Dash produced film, Paid in Full, in which he played one of three main characters alongside Mekhi Phifer and Wood Harris. In 2006, started shooting his movie for his album titled Killa Season, the film would mark both Cam'ron's screenwriting and directorial debuts, as well as his return to acting. Killa Season was released to DVD on April 25, 2006, after a special two-day theatrical release.


=== Fashion designing ===
On February 11, 2014, Cam'ron, along with fashion designer Mark McNairy, revealed their "Cape line" during the New York fashion week. On October 20, 2014, via his Instagram, Cam'ron revealed and released his "Ebola mask", stating on the caption: "Ebola is no joking matter, so if u have to be safe, be fashionable". Cam'ron also has a fashion clothing line titled "Dipset USA" which is branded off his former label Diplomat Records.


=== Sports commentary ===
In 2023, Cam'ron launched an independently-produced sports' news talk show, called It is What It is. Cam'ron's co-host on the show is rapper, Mase. The show's first episode premiered on February 27, 2023 on YouTube. In the months proceeding the show's launch, it has achieved viral success on the internet. According to Cam'ron, he has already turned down several multi-million dollar offers from buyers looking to purchase the show.


== Controversies ==


=== Jay-Z ===
Although there had been rumors of a feud between the two emcees, Cam'ron went public first with a track on "Killa Season" called "You Gotta Love It (Jay-Z Diss)" featuring ex-Dipset member Max B. In the song, Cam'ron takes jabs at Jay-Z's age, his alleged "biting" (stealing) of lyrics, and his current girlfriend. He references Jay-Z using The Notorious B.I.G.'s rhymes, rapping "You ain't the only one with big wallets got it my shit's brolick but ya publishing should go to Miss Wallace." He then released another song "Swagger Jacker (Biter Not a Writer)" to highlight the many songs Jay-Z has borrowed lines from. In the next issue of XXL, Cam'ron explained the beef originated when Jay-Z became CEO and President of Roc-A-Fella Records. In 2010, Cam'ron stated he does not have any issues with Jay-Z anymore.
In 2013, on "Pound Cake", a song by Drake, Jay-Z mentioned Cam'ron again by rapping (in the middle of a verse): 

Now here's the icing on the cake/ Cake, cake-cake, cake-cake, uhh/ I'm just getting started, oh, yeah, we got it bitch/ I've done made more millionaires than the lotto did/ Dame made millions, Bigg made millions/ Ye made millions, Just made millions/ Lyor made millions, Cam made millions/ Beans would tell you if he wasn't in his feelin[g]s
Cam replied briefly on "Come and Talk to Me" off of Ghetto Heaven Vol. 1:

She said Jay made you a millionaire? and looked me in the eyes/ Said cake, cake, cake, got that from the pies/ We made each other millions, that was my reply/ had a mill before I met him, baby, that ain't no lie/ See he named some Harlem cats and the homie from the Chi / but my thing, he ain't name nobody from the Stuy
On April 26, 2019, he and Jay-Z ended their feud at the re-opened Webster Hall.


=== 50 Cent ===
On February 1, 2007, Cam'ron and 50 Cent had a live argument on The Angie Martinez Show on Hot 97 radio. 50 Cent commented that he felt Koch Entertainment was a "graveyard", meaning major record labels would not work with their artists. Cam'ron then ridiculed the record sales of G-Unit members Lloyd Banks and Mobb Deep by pointing out that Dipset member Jim Jones outsold both of their albums despite not being signed to a major label, and also went on to clarify that his group, The Diplomats, had a distribution deal from several labels. Both rappers released diss songs with videos on YouTube. 50 Cent released "Funeral Music", and suggested in the song that Cam'ron is no longer able to lead The Diplomats and that Jim Jones should take his place. Cam'ron responded with "Curtis" and "Curtis Pt. II", in which he makes fun of 50 Cent's appearance, calling him "a gorilla, with rabbit teeth". 50 Cent responded by releasing "Hold On" with Young Buck. Since 2009, the feud slowly died down, and they eventually reconciled in 2016.


=== Jim Jones ===
Cam'ron revealed in 2007 that he was no longer speaking to his fellow Diplomat members Juelz Santana and Jim Jones, leading to speculation that the group had officially broken up. However, despite admitting that he did not want to contact Jim Jones, he said that he had no hard feelings towards him. In an interview with Miss Info, Cam'ron said: "I still haven't spoken to Jim. But Jim ran with me for over 10 years, he worked hard, and I wish him the best of luck. Everybody thinks I'm mad at Jim. Why am I mad? I told people for years that Jimmy was gonna be a star. So it's better on my resume. I wish him the best." After three years of not speaking, Cam'ron and Jim Jones mended their differences in April 2010. In late 2011, both appeared together on Wolfgang Gartner's album Weekend in America, on the track "Circus Freaks".


=== Stop Snitchin' ===
On April 22, 2007, Cam'ron was interviewed on 60 Minutes as part of a piece on the Stop Snitchin' movement. He also stated that he would "not help the police" try to locate the shooter saying he is "not a snitch" and helping the police would probably hurt his record sales. He stated in the interview, "Because with the type of business I'm in, it would definitely hurt my business. And the way that I was raised, I just don't do that. I was raised differently, not to tell... It's about business but it's still also a code of ethics" When asked by Anderson Cooper if he would tell the police if a serial killer was living next to him, Cam'ron replied "I would probably move" but would not inform the police.
Cam'ron later issued an apology for his comments, calling them an "error in judgement": "Where I come from, once word gets out that you've cooperated with the police that only makes you a bigger target of criminal violence. That is a dark reality in so many neighborhoods like mine across America. I'm not saying its right, but its reality. And it's not unfounded. There's a harsh reality around violence and criminal justice in our inner cities." Cam'ron has had contact with the police in the past. According to The Smoking Gun, New York Police Department records indicate that Giles filed a report with police after he was assaulted at a park in Harlem in 1999.


=== Kanye West ===
Both Cam'ron and Jim Jones took out their frustrations on former label-mate Kanye West in defense of former CEO Dame Dash (due to their longtime friendship dating back to growing up in Harlem) by releasing a song titled "Toast" rhyming over Kanye West's song "Runaway". The feud eventually ended, evidenced by Cam'ron, Jim Jones, and Kanye West collaborating on a song called "Christmas in Harlem".


== Personal life ==
On October 23, 2005, Cam'ron was leaving a nightclub in Washington D.C., having performed the day before at Howard University. While stopped at a traffic light at the intersection of New York and New Jersey Avenue shortly after midnight, a passenger of a nearby car threatened Cam'ron to "give up" his 2006 Lamborghini. Cam'ron resisted, and the man then shot him. Cam'ron was struck at least once as he was holding the steering wheel, but he was able to drive, going the wrong way on streets and flashing his lights, until a fan drove him to Howard University Hospital. The gunman and passenger drove off, crashed into a parked car, and fled the scene. D.C. Metro Police recovered a cell phone from the scene of the crash, which they tried to use to trace the suspects. He stated that he does not know who shot him, although later, in the song "Gotta Love It" featuring Max B, Cam'ron claims that he saw the gunman throw up the Roc-A-Fella Records diamond hand signal before shots were fired.


== Discography ==

Studio albumsConfessions of Fire (1998)
S.D.E. (2000)
Come Home with Me (2002)
Purple Haze (2004)
Killa Season (2006)
Crime Pays (2009)
Purple Haze 2 (2019)Collaboration albumsHeat in Here Vol. 1 (with Vado) (2010)
Gunz n' Butta (with Vado) (2011)
U Wasn't There (with A-Trak) (2022)


== Filmography ==
Paid in Full (2002)
Death of a Dynasty (2003)
State Property 2 (2005)
Killa Season (2006)
Rap Sheet: Hip-Hop and the Cops (2006)
First Of The Month (2012)
Percentage (2013)
Love & Hip Hop: New York (2012; 2016–2017)
Honor Up (2018)
Queens (2021)


== References ==


== External links ==
Cam'ron on Twitter 
Cam'ron at IMDbGermaine Williams (born December 9, 1974), better known by his stage name Canibus, is a Jamaican-American rapper. He gained fame in the 1990s for his ability to freestyle, and released his debut album Can-I-Bus in 1998. Canibus has released 13 solo studio albums, as well as multiple collaboration albums and EPs with other rappers as a member of the Four Horsemen, Refugee Camp All-Stars, Sharpshooterz, Cloak N Dagga, the Undergods and one-half of T.H.E.M.
About.com placed him at number 32 on their list of the "Top 50 MCs of Our Time (1987–2007)", while in 2012 The Source placed him number 44 on their list of the Top 50 Lyricists of All Time.


== Early life ==
Williams was born on December 9, 1974, in Kingston, Jamaica. He is of Jamaican descent. His father, Basil Williams, was a Jamaican and West Indian cricketer. The family moved frequently, living in The Bronx; Newark, New Jersey; Washington, D.C.; Atlanta; Miami; Buffalo; and London due to his mother's career requiring constant relocation. Canibus stated that he was an introverted child growing up.After completing high school in 1992, he spent a year working for AT&T Corporation and another year as a data analyst for the U.S. Department of Justice. He studied computer science at DeKalb College in Atlanta.


== Career ==


=== Early career (1992–1996) ===
He began rhyming in the early 1990s and by 1992 under the name Canibus Sativa, and formed a duo called T.H.E.M. (The Heralds of Extreme Metaphors) with Atlanta rapper Webb (now called C.I., also known as Central Intelligence). In 1996, T.H.E.M. split and Canibus teamed with businessman Charles Suitt. That same year Charles Suitt introduced Canibus to platinum producer Frankie Cutlass and the two collaborated on a song. Canibus also appeared on the Music Makes Me High remix by the Lost Boyz featuring Tha Dogg Pound making it Canibus' first official appearance on a record.
In December 1997, Canibus first publicly discussed a verbal confrontation with LL Cool J in an interview with Tourè for The Village Voice. Also attending the interview was John Forté, DMX, Big Pun, Mos Def and Mic Geronimo. The roundtable discussion was recorded by Kurt Nice and featured in Shades of Hip Hop compilation Hot 2 Def in 1998 and re-released in 2004 on Shades of Hip Hop: The Cypher.


=== Debut album (1997–1998) ===
Canibus' debut album Can-I-Bus was released on September 8, 1998. The song "Second Round K.O.", produced by Wyclef Jean, was a success, with the video featuring Wyclef and a cameo appearance by boxer Mike Tyson. Despite eventually being certified Gold.The album contained a lot of socially-conscious material, such as corruption within the U.S. government, AIDS, and violence in modern America.Canibus had a feud with LL Cool J over a verse that Canibus gave on LL's track "4,3,2,1" from his album Phenomenon. The track featured Canibus, Method Man, Redman, and DMX. Canibus's verse began with the line "Yo LL, is that a mic on your arm? Let me borrow that," referring to the microphone tattoo on LL Cool J's arm which LL Cool J interpreted as Canibus insulting him. When the final cut of the song came out it featured LL Cool J's verse after Canibus's, mocking an unspecified person believed to be Canibus.


=== Wyclef feud, second album (1999–2000) ===
Because Wyclef produced the majority of the tracks on Can-I-Bus, Williams blamed him for the general dissatisfaction with Can-I-Bus and cut ties with him, going as far as to diss Wyclef on the title track of his second album 2000 B.C. ("You mad at the last album? I apologize for it / Yo, I can't call it, motherfucking Wyclef spoiled it!"). 
2000 B.C. featured the first collaboration between Canibus and Kurupt, Ras Kass and Killah Priest, a rap supergroup collectively known as the Hrsmn (referring to the Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse), on the track "Horsementality". Though following 2000 B.C.'s release it had been announced that the group would be releasing an album, these plans never materialized, with only an EP of outtakes from 2001 entitled The Horsemen Project released by Killah Priest's management in 2003. Since 2000, however, the members of the group have worked together on various songs and rumors of a full-length HRSMN album have persisted and include speculation about collaborations with Pharoahe Monch, Common and Rakim, among others.
Wyclef Jean would respond to Canibus's earlier remark on the track "However You Want It" from his album, The Ecleftic: 2 Sides II a Book.
Though much bitterness between Canibus and Wyclef Jean remained for a period of time, the two artists finally settled their differences at the end of 2004; they have since worked together on two remixes of the Machel Montano song "Carnival Survivors". In an interview with HipHopsite.com conducted in November 2005, Williams revealed that he had recorded five songs with Wyclef and Jerry 'Wonder' Duplessis at Platinum Studios in New York for the upcoming Fugees reunion album. Whether or not those recordings will appear on the album has not been determined yet.


=== C True Hollywood Stories (2001) ===
In 2001, Canibus released his third album, C True Hollywood Stories. It was released on Archives Music, an independent label owned by Williams' future business partner, Louis Lombard III.
In an interview conducted in 2005, Williams' former promoter, Pak-Man, who worked on over half of the album with the rapper, spoke on the record, with his explanation leaning toward the album being intended as satire: "At that time Canibus was in the studio recording a lot of songs and [I] mean a lot, but he didn't want to make the fans wait no more so he did C True Hollywood Stories and he wanted to have fun wit, so thats what we did we had fun wit". In an interview on AllHipHop.com posted on April 8, 2005, Williams was asked what direction he was trying to take with that album; in his response, he stated "That album depicts the state of affairs in my life at the time – nothing more, nothing less".


=== Mic Club: The Curriculum and Rip the Jacker (2002–2003) ===
His fourth full-length album Mic Club: The Curriculum was released in 2002. Although the production was handled almost entirely by little-known producers, some of them from Europe, the record proved to be a greater critical success than the previous year's release. Mic Club also saw Canibus return to a more complex rapping style, with a number of concept tracks and few songs with a chorus. The album was released on Mic Club Music, Canibus' own label, but failed to chart, selling relatively few copies.
Following the release of Mic Club: The Curriculum, it was announced that Williams decided to join the United States Army. Before commencing his work with the military, however, he recorded a number of tracks which he intended to be released on his next album, entitled Rip the Jacker. Stoupe the Enemy of Mankind was given the task of producing the entire record, equipped solely with Canibus' pre-recorded vocals. Due to his military obligations, Canibus himself only managed to review the album after having acquired a copy.
Upon release, Rip the Jacker received rave reviews from the majority of critics, who noted that Williams' largely scientific lyrics and distinctive, rough delivery was finally matched by equally fine production, as Canibus had a history of working with badly selected producers. Unlike Mic Club, Rip the Jacker charted on both Billboard's R&B/hip-hop charts and the Billboard 200, peaking at #34 and #197.
Critics highlighted various aspects of Rip the Jacker's originality, both in terms of beats and lyrics; Stoupe had employed a large number of samples from often obscure compositions, while Canibus himself undertook a variety of topics from various perspectives. Of note was the inclusion of "Poet Laureate II", a song exceeding seven minutes in length and lacking a chorus, with several changes of beat throughout; the track was frequently singled out as one of the strongest in Canibus' career and the album as a whole convinced listeners and the industry alike that the rapper had not lost his potential.


=== Mind Control, Cloak n Dagga and Hip-Hop for Sale (2005–2006) ===
Following Rip the Jacker and Canibus' subsequent discharge from the army, an album entitled Mind Control (2005) was released to negative reviews. Canibus had never planned for it to be compiled as a separate record, but agreed to release it through the independent Gladiator Music label as part of a contractual agreement; most of the vocals for Mind Control had been recorded prior to the release of C True Hollywood Stories. A collection of previously recorded material (with only three of the songs being unreleased) produced entirely by Mark Sparks, the album failed to chart and is rarely considered an official Canibus release by the rapper's fans.
Also in 2005, a collaboration between Williams and underground rapper Phoenix Orion, who had also been known for scientific lyrics, yielded the album Def Con Zero, released on the independent Head Trauma Records label, owned by K-1 kickboxer Dewey Cooper. The record featured guest appearances from Kool G Rap, K-Solo, and former 106 & Park host Free, among others. As Cloak N Dagga, the duo briefly toured the United States promoting the release.
The following month, after numerous delays, Canibus' seventh solo album, Hip-Hop for Sale, was released, but was panned by critics, who dismissed it as yet another failed attempt to gain mainstream recognition. Additionally, due to the earlier release of Mind Control and the leaking of most of the material in the form of a mixtape entitled The Vitruvian Man, the release date had been pushed back to November, the original date having been May. The production on Hip-Hop for Sale was handled in part by Virginia-based producer Nottz, with several relatively unknown producers handling the remaining tracks after Nottz had cut ties with Canibus due to the appearance of The Vitruvian Man. The day of Hip-Hop for Sale's release, Mic Club Master Volume One, a separate mixtape, appeared in stores, many of the songs receiving more praise than those present on the full-length album.


=== For Whom the Beat Tolls (2007) ===
In January 2007, it was announced that Canibus would release new material in 2007 exclusively on his own imprint, Mic Club Music, in a joint venture with Legion Entertainment and distributed via his former major label, Universal Music Group. A pair of mixtapes, titled Nothing to Prove and Nothing to Lose, were slated for release in March 2007, but were eventually scrapped; instead, Canibus decided to use the best material from each mixtape to create a new full-length album entitled For Whom the Beat Tolls.
When the record was originally announced in March, there was only one confirmed track – the third installment in Canibus' "Poet Laureate" series, "Poet Laureate Infinity". The track has 1,000 bars, in the form of five 200 bar verses, and is layered in such a way that "when you mix it and spread it throughout five channels, [you have the ability] to mix the track differently every time"."For Whom the Beat Tolls" was originally set for release in May 2007, but was pushed back one month, and a released on June 12, 2007 (though it was not distributed by Universal as previously reported). The album has 16 tracks and includes contributions from Killah Priest and Vinnie Paz, among others, and featured two personally made mixes of the "Poet Laureate Infinity" track ("Poet Laureate Infinity v003" and "Poet Laureate Infinity v004").
Following the release of "For Whom the Beat Tolls", Canibus went on a sporadic tour in the U.S. to promote the record. In August 2007, Canibus made an announcement on his Myspace page that he had cut ties with his business partner Louis Lombard: "To my friends, family and fans, Just wanted everybody to know I no longer do business with Louis Lombard, III & Mic Club Music.


=== Melatonin Magik (2010) ===
In December 2009, it was announced that Canibus was in the process of releasing his 9th studio album Melatonin Magik. Melatonin Magik was released on February 9, 2010, to relatively positive reviews, being regarded as one of his most focused efforts yet. The album included several guest appearances (DZK~PR~ & Warbux), a marked contrast to many of his previous albums in which he kept features at a minimum.


=== C of Tranquility (2010) ===
C of Tranquility was released on October 5, 2010. Producers include DJ Premier, Jake One, Scram Jones, Tha Bizness and J-Zone. Originally recorded in 2008, it was sent to Interdependent Media for track mastery and release. Many of the beats were changed, and a few of the tracks were shortened.


=== Lyrical Law (2011) ===
Originally intended to be a Melatonin Magik remix album, as more and more guests were invited to feature, Canibus decided to also record new material for the album, and it quickly evolved into an official solo album. In April 2011, it was announced that he would be selling the album through his new website, canibuscatalogue.com in order to have more control over promotion and sale.
A track entitled "Spring Training" was released by Joe Budden two days after "Lyrical Law VS Joey Cupcakes" containing lines directed towards Canibus. To many, the track appears to be a response. This is untrue however, as the track was recorded prior to having a conflict with Canibus. As of June 2011, an official response from either Royce or Budden (aside from brief messages on Twitter) has yet to surface.


=== Canibus vs Dizaster (2012) ===
Canibus completed his first rap battle for King of the Dot on June 9, 2012. Canibus participated in the first two rounds before pulling out a notepad to read his bars during the third round, after admitting defeat and wishing to recite what he said were "30 pages of rhymes" that he had failed to memorize. The battle was part of King of the Dot's Fresh Coast division in L.A.A fake open letter, attributed to Canibus appeared on Tumblr, though it was later debunked by his manager.. Canibus later released an official statement on his Facebook page. About the battle itself, Canibus commented that "Sometimes people need laughter and entertainment at the expense of others embarrassment but hip hop means so much to me I don't care."


== Personal life ==
In 2002, Canibus signed up for the United States Army. In a 2005 interview, Canibus stated "I enlisted because I wanted to get away from the music... I wanted to do something that gave me a separate definition from what I had done all through my teens and twenties. I was 28 when I enlisted." In 2004, he was caught smoking cannabis and was subsequently discharged.


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===
Solo

Can-I-Bus (1998)
2000 B.C. (Before Can-I-Bus) (2000)
C! True Hollywood Stories (2001)
Mic Club: The Curriculum (2002)
Rip the Jacker (2003) (produced by Stoupe the Enemy of Mankind)
Mind Control (2005)
Hip-Hop for Sale (2005)
For Whom the Beat Tolls (2007)
Melatonin Magik (2010)
C of Tranquility (2010)
Lyrical Law (2011)
Fait Accompli (2014)
Time Flys, Life Dies... Phoenix Rise (2015) (produced by Bronze Nazareth)
Kaiju (2021) (produced by Body Bag Ben)
One Step Closer to Infinity (2022)Collaborations

The Horsemen Project (2003) (with Killah Priest, Kurupt & Ras Kass, as The Four Horsemen)
Def Con Zero (2005)  (with Phoenix Orion, as Cloak N Dagga)
In Gods We Trust – Crush Microphones to Dust (2011) (with Keith Murray, as The Undergods)
Lyrical Warfare (2011) (with Webb, as T.H.E.M.; recorded from 1993 to 1995)
The 2nd Coming (2013) (with Bronze Nazareth, Cappadonna, M-Eighty, Nino Grave & Planet Asia, as Almighty)
The Last Ride (2021) (with Killah Priest, Kurupt & Ras Kass, as HRSMN)
Microphone Land (2021) (with Jaximus)


=== EPs ===
Canibus & Keith Murray Are The Undergods (2009) (with Keith Murray, as The Undergods)
Historic EP (2014) (with Killah Priest, Kurupt & Ras Kass, as HRSMN)
Full Spectrum Dominance (2018)
Full Spectrum Dominance 2 (2018)
Matrix Theory I (2018) (with Marty McKay)
Full Spectrum Dominance 3 (2019)
Matrix Theory II (2019) (with Marty McKay)
Full Spectrum Dominance: Repolarization (2019)
Matrix Theory III (2019) (with Marty McKay)
Matrix Theory IV (2020) (with Marty McKay)
Matrix Theory V (2021) (with Marty McKay)
C (2022) (with Pete Rock)


== Filmography ==
Eyes on Hip Hop (1995) – self
Bamboozled (2000) – Mo Blak
Beef II (2004) – self
The MC: Why We Do It (2005) – self


== References ==


== External links ==

Canibus at AllMusic 
Epic Canibus Interview (CWR Radio)Donald Cannon (born August 2, 1979) is an American DJ, record producer, songwriter, and record executive. Cannon is a co-founder of the Atlantic Records imprint, Generation Now. He was also a member of the prominent Atlanta mixtape collective, Aphilliates Music Group, with his long-time collaborator and fellow Generation Now founder, DJ Drama. Over the course of his career, Cannon has produced tracks and albums for artists like Jeezy, Logic, Lil Uzi Vert, Lil Wayne, Ludacris, 50 Cent, and numerous others. He also served as the Vice President of A&R at Def Jam Recordings.


== Early life and education ==
Cannon was born on August 2, 1979, in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. He was raised largely in West Philadelphia. At the age of 5, he received his first set of turntables, a mixer, and a karaoke machine. By age 11, he had DJed numerous events, including his aunt's wedding reception. After high school, Cannon moved to Atlanta, Georgia to attend Clark Atlanta University. While there, he met up with other Philadelphia natives, DJ Drama and DJ Sense. The three formed the Aphilliates while in college together as a loose collection of DJs. Cannon also began DJing parties and clubs in Atlanta's inner city.


== Career ==
Cannon, along with DJ Drama and DJ Sense, officially co-founded the Aphilliates Music Group (AMG) in Atlanta in 2003. Cannon often produced tracks on DJ Drama's prominent mixtape series, Gangsta Grillz, which featured artists like Jeezy, Lil Wayne, Gucci Mane, Ludacris, Fabolous, T.I., and numerous others.Some of Cannon's most notable early production credits with Aphilliates included Jeezy's "Go Crazy" featuring Jay-Z, 50 Cent's "Man Down," and Ludacris' "Everybody Hates Chris." Cannon also helped develop mixtape series like Lil Wayne's Dedication, T.I. and P$C's In da Streets, and Jeezy's Trap or Die. He would go on to co-host a show on Atlanta's WHTA and became a music director for the show Streets Iz Watchin on the Sirius XM Radio station, Shade 45. Good Day Atlanta, the morning show on Atlanta's Fox affiliate, also named him "Atlanta's Best DJ."In September 2006, the Aphilliates Music Group entered into a strategic partnership with Asylum Records. In January 2007, however, Aphilliates' Atlanta offices were raided by local police at the behest of the RIAA, and Cannon and DJ Drama were arrested on RICO charges. Authorities seized 81,000 mixtapes and various pieces of recording equipment in the raid.That raid and others like it were subject to public outcry in the aftermath, with some music industry insiders describing the RIAA and its constituent members as "schizophrenic." Aphilliates had largely operated with the express permission of major record labels at the time, because AMG helped promote their artists. Neither Cannon nor DJ Drama were ever convicted in relation to the raid.In December 2008, Cannon announced his departure from the Aphilliates, opting to focus on his own production and promotion company, Cannon Music, LLC. In 2009, he produced the theme song for Tyler Perry's TBS sitcom, House of Payne. He also produced season themes for the Atlanta Hawks and the Atlanta Thrashers. From 2009 to 2012, Cannon produced, mixed, and/or hosted numerous mixtapes and tracks for artists like Big Sean (Finally Famous Vol. 3: Big), The Cool Kids (Gone Fishing), Curren$y (Smokee Robinson), Jeezy (Trap or Die II), Trouble (Green Light), and Lil Reese (Don't Like; hosted with DJ Drama).In July 2013, Cannon was named the Vice President of A&R at Def Jam Recordings. He is credited with signing and fostering numerous artists while at the label. In August 2013, Cannon reunited with DJ Drama and DJ Sense to co-found a new media collective called The Academy. In September of that year, The Academy announced its initial roster of 23 DJs.In 2015, Cannon and DJ Drama founded the record label, Generation Now, as an imprint of Atlantic Records. One of the first artists they signed that year was Lil Uzi Vert. Cannon served as executive producer on Uzi's 2015 debut commercial mixtape, Luv Is Rage. He also served as executive producer on Uzi's 2017 studio album, Luv Is Rage 2, which topped the Billboard 200 chart. Other artists that Cannon and Drama have signed to the label include, Skeme, Jack Harlow, Lil James, and Killumantii.


== Discography ==


== Recognition and awards ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Generation NowCurtis Anthony Jackson II (born August 2, 1995), known professionally as Capella Grey, is an American singer, songwriter, rapper and record producer from the Bronx, New York. He is the founder of Allepac the Family and signed a joint venture with Capitol. He released two mixtapes in 2020 and received widespread recognition in 2021 with his breakout single "Gyalis".


== Early life ==
Curtis Jackson II was born in New Rochelle, New York. He grew up in a Jamaican family and started playing instruments at a young age, learning how to play music from church. He was raised in the Bronx where he went to Harry S. Truman High School. He developed his musical career in Mount Vernon, New York after graduating high school.


== Musical career ==


=== 2016–2020: Career beginnings and early mixtapes ===
Capella Grey started his musical career writing and producing for other artists, including "Love You Better" by King Combs featuring Chris Brown. He signed an R&B girl group called Rèign to Allepac Records, and wrote and produced their debut album released in 2019. On January 8, 2020, he released his debut mixtape Yea Nah I'm Out, followed by his second mixtape The QuaranTape Vibe 1.


=== 2021–present: Vibe Responsibly Vol. 1 ===
On January 4, 2021, he released the single "Gyalis", which samples Juvenile's "Back That Azz Up". The song went viral in New York and on social media platforms, spawning unofficial remixes from A Boogie wit da Hoodie, Kranium, Tory Lanez, Angel and Haile, among others. The song reached number 10 on the Billboard Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart, and was called the "song of the summer" by multiple publications. The official remix was released on October 1, 2021, featuring Popcaan and Chris Brown. He signed with Capitol in 2021, saying they are "not trying to change me as an artist to meet the standards or expectations of music now, which is why I went with them."On December 17, 2021, Capella Grey released the single "Talk Nice". On March 18, 2022, he released the single "Confujawn" with Nija. On May 6, he released the music video for "Sas Crise" featuring Alayzha Sky and Ghost, and directed by Mikey Scho. On June 10, Capella Grey released the single "OT" featuring Ty Dolla Sign.He appeared on Chris Brown's album Breezy, on the song "Till The Wheels Fall Off" featuring Lil Durk. On July 1, he was featured on DJ Drama's single "Forever" featuring Fabolous, Benny the Butcher, and Jim Jones. Capella Grey was the opening act for Joey Badass on a 20-date summer concert tour, the 1999-2000 Tour. On July 22, he also featured on the song "Welcome Back" with Joey Badass and Chris Brown, on the album 2000.


== Artistry ==
Capella Grey described his musical style as "singing at the tempo of a rapper", and cited Kranium, Ty Dolla Sign, Charlie Wilson, Jodeci, Diddy, 50 Cent, and Dipset as his musical influences. He calls the genre of his music "RNBOP", which was coined by his frequent collaborator BBearded.


== Allepac the Family ==
Allepac the Family ("Capella" spelled backwards) is an American record label based in New York City founded by Capella Grey. The label signed a joint venture deal with Capitol. Capella Grey talked about the deal saying "they are a great team of record breakers and I am excited to work with them."


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===


=== Extended plays ===


=== Mixtapes ===


=== Singles ===


==== As lead artist ====


==== As featured artist ====


=== Other charted songs ===


=== Guest appearances ===


== Writing discography ==


== Production discography ==


== Filmography ==


=== Film and television ===


=== Music videos ===


==== As lead artist ====


==== As featured artist ====


== Tours ==


=== Supporting ===
1999-2000 Tour (Joey Badass) (2022)


== Awards and nominations ==


== Notes ==


== References ==Courtney Everald Dewar Jr. (July 7, 1993 – December 23, 2012), better known by his stage name Capital Steez (stylized as Capital STEEZ), was an American rapper from Brooklyn, New York. He was a founder of the Brooklyn-based rap collective Pro Era, along with childhood friend Joey Bada$$. Capital Steez was also a co-founder of the Beast Coast movement, which consists of three main groups based in Flatbush: Pro Era, Flatbush Zombies, and The Underachievers. Capital Steez died by suicide on December 24, 2012, after jumping from the roof of the Cinematic Music Group headquarters aged 19. Both Pro Era and Beast Coast went on to gain international success in the years following his death.


== Early life ==
Courtney Everald Dewar Jr. was born in New York City to Jamaican parents. His father died when he was three years old. Dewar attended Public School 222 Elementary School in Brooklyn, and he formed his first rap group with close friend Jakk the Rhymer (real name Jahkari Jack) in the fourth grade.
Dewar attended Edward R. Murrow High School and classmates remembered him as a "smiling kid with a short afro and skinny jeans" who made friends quickly, skated, smoked cannabis frequently and was a sneakerhead.Raised as a Christian, Dewar abandoned those beliefs during high school, instead beginning to favor Rastafari which would later come to be a core part of his life. Dewar's beliefs changed once again as he began watching Spirit Science: a popular YouTube series dealing with metaphysical and spiritual theories.


== Career ==


=== 2008–2011: Career beginnings ===
Jamal Dewar began rapping in 2008, forming a group with Jakk the Rhymer called The 3rd Kind. The duo released their first mixtape, The Yellow Tape, in the same year.
In the spring of 2011, while studying at Edward R. Murrow High School in Brooklyn, Capital STEEZ and producer Powers Pleasant formed Pro Era. The group was conceived while the pair were on their way home from a STEEZ performance at a local Brooklyn cafe, which a number of friends including Joey Bada$$ and Dirty Sanchez also attended to show support.Capital STEEZ is credited with being the person who coined the term "Beast Coast Movement", a name for the rise in popularity of East Coast hip-hop groups such as Pro Era, The Underachievers, and Flatbush Zombies. The three groups all come from Brooklyn and frequently use the phrase Beast Coast in songs and on concert flyers.


=== 2012: AmeriKKKan Korruption and rise in popularity ===
On February 23, 2012, Joey Bada$$ and Capital STEEZ uploaded "Survival Tactics" to YouTube. He was listed in "The 25 Best Rap Lines of 2012" by Spin.Capital STEEZ released his first solo mixtape, AmeriKKKan Korruption, on April 7, 2012, with 14 tracks. The mixtape has received universal acclaim since its release. A "reloaded" version with seven additional tracks was released on October 10, 2012. The tape now runs 21 tracks in total and features many of his Pro Era teammates, such as CJ Fly, Chuck Strangers, Joey Bada$$, Dirty Sanchez, and Jakk the Rhymer. The mixtape contains production from Madlib, MF DOOM, Free the Robots, DJ Premier, Knxwledge, Ant of Atmosphere, J. Rawls, Tommy Mas, the Entreproducers, and also contains production from fellow Pro Era members, Joey Bada$$, Kirk Knight, and Bruce Leekix.


== Personal life ==
Steez's spiritual outlook included elements of Egyptian mysticism, numerology, astral projection and the Indian chakra system. He considered himself one of the Indigo children and allegedly believed he was a being of a higher dimension.  Steez was infatuated with the number 47 and what it meant spiritually. He believed the number 47 was the "perfect expression of balance in the world", representing the tension between the heart and the brain (the fourth and seventh chakra, respectively.) The number featured on the cover of AmeriKKKan Korruption, stylized to resemble a swastika.


== Death and posthumous works ==
On the night of December 23, 2012, Capital Steez made his way to the rooftop of the Cinematic Music Group headquarters in Manhattan’s Flatiron District, where he texted a few of his closest friends to tell them that he loved them, and at 11:59 p.m. EST, posted a tweet saying, "The end." He died by suicide by jumping off the building later that night.In late April 2013, Joey Badass announced that a Capital Steez album entitled King Capital would soon be released. On July 7, 2013, Pro Era released the song "King Steelo" from the upcoming posthumous album.On December 24, 2013, the first anniversary of his death, Pro Era released a music video for his song, "47 Piiirates". On August 26, 2016, the official Pro Era YouTube channel released an animated music video for his song, "Herban Legend", which premiered at the second annual Steez Day Concert in Los Angeles, California, on July 7, 2016.On June 12, 2017, Capital Steez's Twitter account posted for the first time since his death tweeting: "The Beginning". Fans immediately realized the tweet was referencing Steez's "The End" tweet, which he tweeted moments before jumping to his death on December 23, 2012. This tweet caused fans and music journalists to speculate the release date for Steez's posthumous album King Capital. It was announced by Joey Bada$$ and Capital Steez's family members at the 2017 Steez Day Concert in July that the album would be released on December 23, 2017, the fifth anniversary of the rapper's death. However, Joey Bada$$ took to Instagram to tell fans that the album would be delayed yet again due to "business legalities and sample clearances."On January 2, 2018, Joey Bada$$ replied to various fans' tweets about Pro Era's release schedule for the year. Among his tweets, Bada$$ told fans he is working on putting Capital Steez's AmeriKKKan Korruption mixtape on Spotify (and potentially other streaming services) and hoping to finally release the King Capital album later in the year.King Capital remains unreleased.


== Legacy ==
In May 2015, Joey Bada$$ announced that Pro Era would hold a "STEEZ Day Festival" to be hosted annually on July 7, Capital STEEZ's birthday, with all proceeds going to the late rapper's family. The inaugural festival was held in Central Park in New York City, while the 2016 festival took place in Los Angeles.In December 2017, Joey Bada$$ unveiled a customized chain depicting Capital STEEZ's face in a similar vein of a Jesus Piece. The piece was dubbed the "Steezus Piece" chain and was custom made by Greg Yuna.On July 7, 2022, which would have been Steez's 29th birthday, Joey Bada$$ released the song Survivors Guilt, a tribute to Steez and his cousin Junior B. The song was later included on his album 2000.


=== Comments by other rappers ===
On March 2, 2016, fellow Brooklyn rapper Troy Ave, in the midst of a feud with Joey Bada$$, commented on the death of Capital Steez on Sway in the Morning, stating: "He didn't pass away; he killed himself. There's a difference. He took his own life. God gave you life, it ain't your right to take that. That's a fact. I got niggas in jail who got life sentences, they might as well be dead. They could've traded their life for his." Troy Ave then received heavy criticism from both fans and fellow artists, including A$AP Ant, A$AP Twelvyy and Styles P who wrote, amongst a series of other tweets: "If you never experienced a family [member] committing suicide you have no fukn [sic] idea about that pain. NONE." Troy Ave later apologized on Twitter for the remarks. In an interview on VladTV, Brooklyn rapper Maino stated that mentioning Capital Steez's suicide was "a bit much".


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===
King Capital (TBA)


=== Mixtapes ===
AmeriKKKan Korruption (2012)
AmeriKKKan Korruption: Reloaded (2012)


=== Collaborations ===
The Yellow Tape (with Jakk the Rhymer as The 3rd Kind) (2009)
The Secc$ TaP.E. (with Pro Era) (2012)
P.E.E.P.: The aPROcalypse (with Pro Era) (2012)


=== Music videos ===


== References ==

Capital STEEZ: King CapitalKiam Akasi Holley (born February 8, 1976), better known by his stage name Capone, is an American rapper known as one half of the East Coast hip hop duo Capone-N-Noreaga (C-N-N), alongside friend and fellow rapper N.O.R.E.


== Career ==
Holley spent some time in jail after the release of C-N-N's debut album The War Report. When he was released, he and N.O.R.E. recorded their second album The Reunion, but shortly after releasing the album, Capone was sent back to jail. In 2004, he recorded the single "I Need Speed", for exclusive use in the video game Need for Speed: Underground 2, which was featured on the game's soundtrack. In early 2005, Def Jam Recordings released Capone from his contract while retaining Noreaga, leaving the group's status in disarray. Capone released his debut album titled Pain, Time & Glory in 2005, but it received poor sales. He also appeared on the Ron Artest album My World.
In 2020 Capone released collaborative album entitled "Guidelines" with one half of the Dogg Pound Daz Dillinger under Empire Distribution


== Personal life ==
Holley is of Haitian descent.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===


== Video games ==
Def Jam Vendetta (2003) as himself
Def Jam: Fight for NY (2004) as himself
Def Jam Fight for NY: The Takeover (2006) as himself


== References ==Darryl Hill, (born September 18, 1968) better known by his stage name Cappadonna, is an American rapper. He is a member of the hip hop collective Wu-Tang Clan and is a member of the hip hop group Theodore Unit together with Ghostface Killah.


== Career ==
Cappadonna (also known as Cappachino) was known to the future members of the Wu-Tang Clan, and had been U-God's mentor. However, Cappadonna went to prison and was replaced in the group by Method Man.Cappadonna made his recording debut as an affiliate of the Wu-Tang Clan on Raekwon's 1995 single "Ice Cream" on Only Built 4 Cuban Linx.... He was also a guest star, along with Raekwon, on Ghostface Killah's solo debut album, Ironman. He made his first appearance on a Wu-Tang Clan album in 1997 on Wu-Tang Forever on the single "Triumph". Following his appearance on Forever, he contributed significantly to the group's third studio album, The W, at which point his appearances were no longer marked with "Featuring Cappadonna", as they had been on Forever. After a falling-out with RZA the next year over royalties, he did not appear at all on the group's subsequent album Iron Flag. He reunited with the group for their concert at 2004's Rock the Bells, and appeared on 2007 release 8 Diagrams.
Cappadonna's status as a Wu-Tang member or as a featured artist has varied throughout the years, while long referred to by both the group and fans as the "Unofficial Tenth Member". Also, while his vocals on 8 Diagrams were not marked with "Feat. Cappadonna", much like The W, he does not appear on the front cover with the original eight living members, and is not featured in the album's booklet with a picture, although he is included in the group's shout-outs sections. In a press conference held October 2, 2014, at Warner Studios for the upcoming release of the Wu-Tang Clan's A Better Tomorrow album, RZA clarified any misunderstanding of Cappadonna's affiliation with Wu-Tang Clan, stating that Cappadonna has been an official member of Wu-Tang Clan since 8 Diagrams.Cappadonna's first solo effort was 1998's The Pillage which debuted and peaked at number 3 on the charts and certified Gold. His follow-up - 2001's The Ying and The Yang - debuted at number 51 on the charts. Staying vigilant in his support of The Clan, he then featured on over 25 releases including classics from Raekwon, Method Man and Ghostface. 
Known for his colorful wardrobe, he frequently refers to fashion designers and his large collection of boutique clothing in his raps.In 2019 Cappadonna was featured in Wu-Tang Clan: Of Mics and Men, a documentary in honor of the 25th anniversary of Wu-Tang Clan's debut album, Enter the Wu-Tang (36 Chambers).


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===


=== Collaboration albums ===


=== Singles and EPs ===
1996 "Taking Drastic Measures"
1996 Don't Be a Menace soundtrack - track "Winter Warz"
1998 "Slang Editorial"
1998 "Run"
1999 "Black Boy"
2001 "Super Model"
2007 "Don't Turn Around"
2009 "Somebody's Got To Go"
2011 "Cuban Link Kings"


== References ==


== External links ==

Cappadonna Interview
Cappadonna Interview with Fake Shore DriveDavid Anthony Love Jr. (born February 7, 1967) is an American DJ and rapper better known by his stage name Kid Capri.


== Early life ==
Kid Capri's humble roots can be traced back to his parents' home in the Bronx, where ten year old David Anthony Love would scratch records on his father's old Zenith stereo system. As soon as he was old enough, he hit the pavement and caught a buzz hustling his DJ mixtapes on the streets and performing local gigs.


== Career ==
Grammy award winning DJ and producer, Kid Capri, is globally known as an originator, innovator, and pioneer of DJ culture. His grass roots hustler mentality became a template for success emulated by the DJs that followed in his footsteps. Dubbed The Guru of Mixtapes, Kid Capri literally redefined the term "DJ" as he blazed a trail with his array of mixtapes and crowd hyping performances. 
Kid Capri was the first DJ to perform on major networks like BET and VH1. He starred in the popular HBO series Russel Simmons Def Comedy Jam and recently returned for The Netflix Def Comedy Jam's 25th Anniversary Special. Kid has produced tracks for artists such as Snoop Dogg, Jay-Z, Madonna, Heavy D, and 50 Cent. He has years of touring experience with legends like Diddy, Jay Z, Aaliyah, Salt-N-Pepa, Timbaland, and most recently RBRM. Kid won a Grammy for producing a song on Jay-Z's album, Hard Knock Life. In 2017 Kid narrated Kendrick Lamar's DAMN album; the only hip hop album to ever win a Pulitzer Prize. Kid premiered his signature crowd hyping vocals at Jennifer Lopez's ALL I HAVE  Las Vegas Residency during the magical portion of her show dedicated to The Bronx.Kid Capri deejayed for seven seasons of Def Comedy Jam. He produced tracks for Boogie Down Productions, Heavy D, Big L and Grand Puba. He eventually released an LP on Warner Brothers Records titled The Tape in 1991. He appeared in the film Who's the Man? in 1993. In 1997, Kid Capri signed with the Track Masters' Columbia Records-distributed label after he appeared on the 1997 Puff Daddy and the Family World Tour. He subsequently released Soundtrack to the Streets in 1998.Kid Capri was involved in his own record label, No Kid'n Records. He was featured on the itshiphop.tv show The Breakdown, in which he talked about his current and future projects, his views on Japan's hip hop scene, and the origin of his stage name. On July 29, 2007, Kid Capri made an appearance during Rock the Bells 2007 as Rakim's DJ. Kid Capri also made an appearance as Rakim's DJ during the Rock the Bells 2008 show on July 19, 2008, in Tinley Park, Illinois.
Kid was featured as lead judge on Smirnoff's Master of the Mix, the BET reality TV competition in search of the nation's best DJ. In March 2012, Kid was commissioned to remix "Masterpiece", an exclusive track featured on the special Smirnoff Nightlife Edition of Madonna's album, MDNA. He joined her for the album release party in Miami as a part of Winter Music Conference, and the album was released on March 26, 2012. Kid was also featured on Kendrick Lamar's song "ELEMENT." in which he has vocal parts in the intro and closing.On May 15, 2021,  Kid Capri was a Bronx Walk of Fame inductee.


== Discography ==


=== Releases ===
The Tape (1991)
Soundtrack to the Streets (1998)
The Love (2022)


=== Singles ===
"Apollo" (1991)
"Joke's on You Jack" (1991)
"Put It On" (with Big L) (1995)
"Unify" (1998)


=== Videos ===
"Crossover" (1992 off EPMD's Business Never Personal)
"DWYCK" (1992 off GangStarr's Hard to Earn)
"Put It On" (1995 off Big L's Lifestylez ov da Poor & Dangerous)
"We Celebrate" (2007 off Ghostface Killah's The Big Doe Rehab)


=== Cameos and roles in film ===
Who's the Man? as himself (1993)
A Get2Gether as Dee Jay (2005)
Def Comedy Jam 25 as himself (2017)


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Kid Capri at IMDb
Kid Capri at Discogs
Kid Capri – Bronx Walk of Fame InducteeBelcalis Marlenis Almánzar Cephus (, Spanish: [alˈmansaɾ]; born October 11, 1992), known professionally as Cardi B, is an American rapper. According to various media outlets, she is regarded as one of the most commercially successful female rappers of her generation. Born and raised in New York City, she first gained popularity through Vine and Instagram. From 2015 to early 2017, she appeared as a regular cast member on the VH1 reality television series Love & Hip Hop: New York, which depicted her pursuit of her music aspirations, and earned further recognition with the release of her two mixtapes: Gangsta Bitch Music, Vol. 1 (2016) and Vol. 2 (2017).
Her first studio album, Invasion of Privacy (2018), debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 and was ranked the top female rap album of the 2010s by Billboard. Critically acclaimed, it made Cardi B the first female artist to win the Grammy Award for Best Rap Album as a solo artist, and marked the first female rap album in 15 years nominated for Album of the Year. It spawned two number-one singles on the  Billboard Hot 100; with "Bodak Yellow", its lead single, Cardi B became the first female rapper to top the Hot 100 with a solo song in the 21st century and the first to achieve a diamond-certified song by the RIAA, while "I Like It" marked the first time a female rapper attained multiple number-one songs on the Hot 100. Her third Hot 100 number-one, the collaboration "Girls Like You" with band Maroon 5, made her the only female rapper to achieve multiple diamond-certified songs by the RIAA. She has since released two singles: "WAP" (featuring Megan Thee Stallion) in 2020 and "Up" in 2021, both of which topped the Hot 100 and other charts worldwide.
Recognized by Forbes as one of the most influential female rappers of all time, Cardi B holds various records among women in hip hop; she is the female rapper with the most number-one singles (five) on the Billboard Hot 100, the only to achieve multiple solo number ones and the only to earn number ones in two decades (2010s and 2020s) on the chart.  She is also the female rapper with the most diamond-certified songs (three) by the RIAA, the highest-certified female rapper of all time on their Top Artists (Digital Singles) ranking, and has 100 million certified units (album and songs) sold in the US alone. Additionally, she is the female rapper with the most songs with a billion streams on Spotify—where she also has the most-streamed female rap album. She was the first lead artist to top the Billboard Global 200. Her accolades include a Grammy Award, eight Billboard Music Awards, six Guinness World Records, six American Music Awards, 14 BET Hip Hop Awards, and two ASCAP Songwriter of the Year awards. In 2018, Time magazine included her on its annual list of the 100 most influential people in the world, and in 2020, Billboard honored her as Woman of the Year. Outside of music, she became the creative director of entertainment magazine Playboy in 2022.


== Early life ==
Belcalis Marlenis Almánzar was born on October 11, 1992, in the Washington Heights neighborhood of Manhattan, New York City. Her father Carlos is Dominican and her mother Clara is a Trinidadian of African and Spanish descent; Almánzar identifies as an Afro-Latina. Almánzar was raised in the Highbridge neighborhood of the South Bronx, and spent much time at her paternal grandmother's home in Washington Heights, which she credits with giving her "such a thick accent." Almánzar developed the stage name "Cardi B" as a derivation of Bacardi, a rum brand that was formerly her nickname. She has a younger sister, Hennessy Carolina, who was born in 1995. She has said she was a gang member with the Bloods in her youth, since age 16, but stated she would not encourage joining a gang. She attended Renaissance High School for Musical Theater & Technology, a vocational high school on the Herbert H. Lehman High School campus.During her teens, Cardi B was employed at an Amish deli in Tribeca. She was fired and became a dancer at a strip club across the street. Cardi B has said that becoming a stripper was positive for her life in many ways: "It really saved me from a lot of things. When I started stripping I went back to school." She stated that she became a stripper to escape poverty and domestic violence, having been in an abusive relationship at the time after being kicked out of her mother's house, and that stripping was her only way to earn enough money to escape the situation and get an education. She attended Borough of Manhattan Community College before eventually dropping out. While stripping, Cardi B lied to her mother by telling her she was making money by babysitting.In 2013, she began to gain publicity due to several of her videos spreading on social media, on Vine and her Instagram page.


== Career ==


=== 2015–2016: Career beginnings ===
In 2015, Cardi B joined the cast of the VH1 reality television series Love & Hip Hop: New York, debuting in season six. Jezebel considered her the breakout star of the show's sixth season. The New York Times wrote that she garnered popularity with "her ability to rattle off one-liners". The sixth and seventh seasons chronicle her rise to stardom and her turbulent relationship with her incarcerated fiancé. On December 30, 2016, after two seasons, she announced that she would be leaving the show to further pursue a career in music.In November 2015, Cardi B made her musical debut on Jamaican reggae fusion singer Shaggy's remix to his single "Boom Boom", alongside fellow Jamaican dancehall singer Popcaan. She made her music video debut on December 15, 2015, with the song "Cheap Ass Weave", her rendition of British rapper Lady Leshurr's "Queen's Speech 4". On March 7, 2016, Cardi B released her first full-length project, a mixtape titled Gangsta Bitch Music, Vol. 1. In November 2016, she was featured on the digital cover of Vibe magazine's "Viva" issue.On September 12, 2016, KSR Group released the compilation Underestimated: The Album, which is a collaboration between KSR Group artists Cardi B, HoodCelebrityy, SwiftOnDemand, Cashflow Harlem, and Josh X. It was previously released only to attendees of their U.S. tour. KSR Group's flagship artist Cardi B said "I wanted to make a song that would make girls dance, twerk and at the same time encourage them to go get that Shmoney," in regard to the compilation's single "What a Girl Likes".She appeared on the December 9, 2015, episode of Uncommon Sense with Charlamagne. On April 6, 2016, she was on the twelfth episode of Khloé Kardashian's Kocktails with Khloé: in this episode, she revealed how she told her mother that she was a stripper. In November 2016, it was announced that she would be joining the cast of the BET series Being Mary Jane. TVLine describes her character, Mercedes, as a "round-the-way beauty with a big weave, big boobs and a big booty to match her oversize, ratchet personality."In 2016, Cardi B was featured in her first endorsement deal with Romantic Depot, a large New York chain of lingerie stores that sell sexual health and wellness products. The ad campaign was featured on radio and cable TV.


=== 2017–2018: Breakthrough with Invasion of Privacy ===
On January 20, 2017, Cardi B released her second mixtape, Gangsta Bitch Music, Vol. 2. In February 2017, Cardi B partnered with MAC Cosmetics and Rio Uribe's Gypsy Sport for an event for New York Fashion Week. In late February, Cardi B signed her first major record label recording contract with Atlantic Records. On February 25, 2017, Cardi B was the opening act for East Coast hip hop group The Lox's Filthy America... It's Beautiful Tour, alongside fellow New York City-based rappers Lil' Kim and Remy Ma. In April 2017, she was featured in i-D's "A-Z of Music" video sponsored by Marc Jacobs. Cardi guest-starred on the celebrity panel show Hip Hop Squares, appearing on the March 13 and April 3, 2017, episodes. She also released the freestyle "Red Barz".In May 2017, the nominees for the 2017 BET Awards were announced, revealing that Cardi B had been nominated for Best New Artist and Best Female Hip-Hop Artist. Although Chance the Rapper and Remy Ma won those categories, respectively, Cardi B performed at the BET Awards Afterparty show. On June 11, 2017, during Hot 97's annual Summer Jam music festival, Remy Ma brought out Cardi B, along with The Lady of Rage, MC Lyte, Young M.A, Monie Love, Lil' Kim, and Queen Latifah, to celebrate female rappers and perform Latifah's 1993 hit single "U.N.I.T.Y." about female empowerment. In June 2017, it was revealed that Cardi B would be on the cover of The Fader's Summer Music issue for July/August 2017. She performed at MoMA PS1 on August 19 to a crowd of 4,000.On June 16, 2017, Atlantic Records released Cardi B's commercial debut single, "Bodak Yellow", via digital distribution. She performed the single on The Wendy Williams Show and Jimmy Kimmel Live! The song climbed the charts for several months, and, on the Billboard Hot 100 chart dated September 25, 2017, "Bodak Yellow" reached the number one spot, making Cardi B the first female rapper to do so with a solo single since Lauryn Hill's "Doo Wop (That Thing)" debuted atop the chart in 1998. The song stayed atop the charts for three consecutive weeks, tying with American pop singer Taylor Swift's "Look What You Made Me Do" as the longest running female at the number one spot in 2017.Cardi B became the first person of Dominican descent to reach number one in the history of the Hot 100 since it was launched in 1958. An editor of The New York Times called it "the rap anthem of the summer". Selected by The Washington Post and Pitchfork music critics as the best song of 2017, "Bodak Yellow" was eventually certified Diamond by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). The song received nominations for Best Rap Performance and Best Rap Song at the 60th Grammy Awards. It won Single of the Year at the 2017 BET Hip Hop Awards.With her collaborations "No Limit" and "MotorSport", she became the first female rapper to land her first three entries in the top 10 of the Hot 100, and the first female artist to achieve the same on the Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart. In October 2017, Cardi B headlined Power 105.1's annual Powerhouse music celebration, alongside the Weeknd, Migos, and Lil Uzi Vert, at the Barclays Center in Brooklyn, New York. In December, she released two songs: a collaboration with Puerto Rican singer Ozuna titled "La Modelo", and "Bartier Cardi", the second single from her debut album.
On January 3, 2018, Cardi B was featured on Bruno Mars' remix version of "Finesse", and appeared in the 90s inspired video. It reached the top three on the Hot 100, Canada and New Zealand. On January 18, 2018, Cardi B became the first woman to have five top 10 singles simultaneously on the Billboard Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart. She released another single, "Be Careful", on March 30, 2018, a week before her album's release.Her debut studio album, Invasion of Privacy, was released on April 6, 2018, to universal acclaim from music critics. Editors from Variety and The New York Times called it "one of the most powerful debuts of this millennium" and "a hip-hop album that doesn't sound like any of its temporal peers," respectively. The album entered at number one in the United States, while she became the first female artist to chart 13 entries simultaneously on the Billboard Hot 100, on the chart issue dated April 21. It became the most streamed album by a female artist in a single week in Apple Music, and the largest on-demand audio streaming week ever for an album by a woman. Cardi held the latter record until 2019. The album's title reflects Cardi B's feeling that as she gained popularity her privacy was being invaded in a variety of ways. Following the album's release, during a performance on Saturday Night Live, Cardi B officially announced her pregnancy, after much media speculation. She also co-hosted an episode of The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon.Several months later, in July 2018, the album's fourth single, "I Like It", which features vocals from Bad Bunny and J Balvin, reached number one on the Hot 100; this marked her second number one on the chart and made her the first female rapper to achieve multiple chart-toppers. It received critical acclaim, with Rolling Stone naming it "the best summer song of all time" in 2020. Her collaboration with Maroon 5, "Girls Like You", also reached number one on the Hot 100 chart, extending her record among female rappers and also making her the sixth female artist to achieve three number-one singles on the chart during the 2010s. The song's music video has received more than 3 billion views on YouTube and was the fifth-best selling song of the year globally.With "Girls Like You" following "I Like It" at the top of the Billboard Radio Songs chart, Cardi B became the first female rapper to ever replace herself at number one on that chart. The single spent seven weeks atop the Hot 100, making Cardi the female rapper with the most cumulative weeks atop the chart, with eleven weeks. It spent 33 weeks in the top 10, tying both Ed Sheeran's "Shape of You" and Post Malone and Swae Lee's "Sunflower" for the longest top 10 run in the chart's archives at the time. In October 2018, Invasion of Privacy was certified double platinum by the RIAA, and the following year it was updated to triple platinum. With the thirteen tracks, she became the first female artist to have all songs from an album certified gold or higher in the US.Cardi B received the most nominations for the 2018 MTV Video Music Awards with 12 mentions—including for Video of the Year, winning three awards. She tied with Drake for the most nominations at the 2018 American Music Awards. She won three AMAs and performed at the ceremony. Her single "Money" earned her a fourth Video Music Award, with visuals that feature Cardi playing characters in different locations, including in an art museum, a bank and a strip club. Her collaboration with DJ Snake "Taki Taki" topped the charts in a number of Hispanic countries, made Cardi B the first female rapper to top the Spotify Global 50 chart, and has garnered more than 2 billion views. Both singles were certified multiple-platinum by the RIAA. People en Español named her Star of the Year, and Entertainment Weekly deemed her "a pop culture phenomenon", as she was named one of "2018 Entertainers of the Year".On November 30, 2018, Cardi B was honored at Ebony's annual Power 100 Gala. Cardi ranked fifth on the 2018 Billboard Year-End Top Artists chart, while Invasion of Privacy ranked sixth. She achieved the most-streamed album of the year by a female artist globally in Apple Music, and ranked as the most streamed female artist of the year in the United States in Spotify. Editorial staff from Apple Music and Billboard named "I Like It" the best song of 2018, while Time magazine and Rolling Stone named Invasion of Privacy the best album of the year. Also in 2018, Time included her on their annual list of the 100 most influential people in the world. In its decade-end review article, NME stated that the era secured "her crown as the new Queen of Rap."


=== 2019–2020: Hustlers, Rhythm + Flow and WAP ===
Cardi B received five nominations at the 61st Grammy Awards, including for Album of the Year, Best Rap Album and Record of the Year ("I Like It"). She became the third female rapper to be nominated for Album of the Year, following Lauryn Hill (1999) and Missy Elliott (2004). On February 10, 2019, she then performed at the award ceremony, where she wore three vintage Thierry Mugler couture looks during the telecast and became the first female rapper to win Best Rap Album as a solo artist.Cardi B led the 2019 Billboard Music Awards nominations, with 21, the most nominations in a single year ever by a woman and the third most nominations in a year ever (behind Drake and The Chainsmokers, who both had 22 in a year). She ended up winning six awards, including for Top Hot 100 Song, bringing her career total wins to seven—the most of any female rapper in history. An article by Omaha World-Herald called her "the biggest rapper in the world."On February 15, 2019, Cardi B released "Please Me", a collaboration with Bruno Mars, which became her seventh top-ten song on the Hot 100, reaching number three. The song marked Cardi and Bruno's second collaboration, following "Finesse" in 2018. The official music video was released two weeks later. On March 1, Cardi set a new attendance record at the Houston Livestock Show and Rodeo, with 75,580 fans in the audience. With "Backin' It Up", "Twerk" and "Money", Cardi became the first female artist to occupy the top three on the Billboard Mainstream R&B/Hip-Hop airplay chart.Her following single titled "Press" was released on May 31, 2019. The parental-advisory labeled music video marked her directorial debut—being credited as co-director, and was released on June 26, 2019. It had its debut performance at the 2019 BET Awards, where she received the most nominations with seven, and won Album of the Year. During the summer of 2019, she embarked on an arena tour. In September, she led the BET Hip Hop Awards nominations with ten.Cardi B made her film debut in Hustlers directed by Lorene Scafaria, opposite Jennifer Lopez, Constance Wu, and Lili Reinhart. The film was released on September 13, 2019. Cardi B, along with Chance the Rapper and T.I., were confirmed as judges for the Netflix series Rhythm + Flow, a ten-part hip-hop talent search that premiered on October 9, 2019, which she also executive produced.In December 2019, Cardi B embarked on her first tour of Africa, performing in Nigeria and Ghana. Her collaboration "Clout" was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Rap Performance. She was the most streamed female rapper of 2019 in the US, according to Spotify. Consequence of Sound deemed her "one of the most formidable hip-hop artists of the decade." In March 2020, Cardi B created a reaction video about the coronavirus pandemic. DJ iMarkkeyz, a Brooklyn DJ known for turning memes and online moments into full-length songs, created a track, based on her reaction titled "Coronavirus", which became an internet meme and was released to music platforms. Netflix announced the return of Rhythm + Flow for 2021.Cardi B released the single "WAP" featuring American rapper Megan Thee Stallion on August 7, 2020, as the lead single off her forthcoming second studio album. The song received critical acclaim and was praised for its sex positive messages. The Colin Tilley-directed music video accompanied the song itself, and broke the record for the biggest 24-hour debut for an all-female collaboration on YouTube. She became the only female rap artist to top the Global Spotify chart multiple times. "WAP" debuted at number-one on the Billboard Hot 100 chart, garnering Cardi B her fourth chart-topper in the US, extending her record as the female rapper with the most number-one singles, and also making her the first female rapper to achieve Hot 100 number one singles in two different decades (2010s and 2020s).With 93 million streaming units, it became the largest first-week streams for a song, breaking the all-time record held by Ariana Grande's "7 Rings". It has spent four weeks atop the Hot 100. The single has also spent multiple weeks at number one in seven other countries, including Australia and the United Kingdom. Neil Shah of The Wall Street Journal deemed it "a big moment for female rappers" and "a historic sign that women artists are making their mark on hip-hop like never before". "WAP" became the first number one single on the inaugural Billboard Global 200 chart.It became critics' best song of the year according to a compilation of rankings made by the BBC, with publications such as Pitchfork and Rolling Stone placing it at number one. Cardi B won the Billboard Music Award for Top Rap Female Artist for the third time at the 2020 ceremony. In December 2020, Cardi B became the first female rapper to be named Woman of the Year at the Billboard Women in Music Awards. With her win for "WAP" at the American Music Awards, she became the first artist to win the American Music Award for Favorite Rap/Hip-Hop Song multiple times, following her win for "Bodak Yellow" in 2018.


=== 2021–present: Upcoming second studio album ===
On February 5, 2021, Cardi B released "Up", the second single from her upcoming studio album. A music video for the single was released alongside it. The song was praised by NME magazine for its lyricism and fresh approach as a successor to "WAP". "Up" debuted at number two on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart, marking the highest debut for a solo female rap song since Lauryn Hill's "Doo Wop (That Thing)" in 1998. The song debuted at number one on the Rolling Stone Top 100, becoming both Cardi B's second number-one single and second number-one debut, as well as the first time a female rapper debuts atop the chart with a solo song. Cardidi B became the first female artist and first lead artist with consecutive number-one debuts on the US Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart, and second overall performer following Drake in 2016. "Up" reached number one on the Billboard Hot 100 after her Grammy Awards performance, making Cher he only female rapper to reach number one multiple times with solo songs, following "Bodak Yellow", and extended her record as the female rapper with the most number-one songs on the Hot 100 as her fifth chart-topper. Cardi B received a second nomination for the Brit Award for International Female Solo Artist.Cardi B made a last-minute appearance in "Big Paper", from DJ Khaled's album Khaled Khaled released on April 30, 2021. Cardi received two nominations for the BET Award for Video of the Year, for the videos "Up" and "WAP", winning for the latter and becoming the first female rapper to win Video of the Year as a lead artist. This became the 10th time that an artist has had two nominated videos in this category as a lead artist, and the second time for her, following her nominations for "Money" and "Please Me" in 2019.She announced her second pregnancy during the performance of her Migos collaboration "Type Shit" at the 2021 ceremony. She also appeared in F9, which was released on June 25, 2021, by Universal Pictures. On July 16, 2021, Cardi B was featured on the Normani single "Wild Side". Cardi collaborated with Lizzo on "Rumors", which debuted at number four on the Billboard Hot 100, becoming Cardi B's tenth top 10 single on the chart, and her seventh number-one on the Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart.Cardi B received six nominations at the 2021 MTV Video Music Awards, including her second nomination for Video of the Year. She also led the nominations for the 2021 BET Hip Hop Awards along with Megan Thee Stallion, with nine each; both rappers won the most awards during the ceremony with three for "WAP", with Cardi becoming the first female artist to win Best Hip Hop Video twice (2019 and 2021).On October 28, 2021, Cardi B previewed her second album to Atlantic Records via her Instagram Story. She captioned "The money people liking the album sounds". On November 2, Cardi B was announced as the host of the 2021 American Music Awards (AMAs). The award show was held at the Microsoft Theater in Los Angeles on November 21, and marked the most social telecast of the year per interactions across social media. During the ceremony, "Up" won the award for Favorite Hip Hop Song, making Cardi B the first artist to win the category three times. Cardi B featured on Summer Walker's 2021 album Still Over It on the opening track "Bitter". Warner Records released the soundtrack for Halle Berry's directorial debut film Bruised on November 19. Selected by executive producers Berry and Cardi B, the Netflix film's soundtrack features six original songs by female artists, including Cardi, H.E.R., City Girls, Flo Milli, Saweetie, and Latto, and seven additional female rap songs inspired by the film.In March 2022, Cardi B appeared on the extended version of Summer Walker and SZA's collaboration, "No Love". The following month, she featured on rapper Kay Flock's song, "Shake It"; it samples Akon's 2005 song "Belly Dancer (Bananza)". On July 1, 2022, Cardi B released "Hot Shit", featuring rappers Kanye West and Lil Durk, as the third single from her upcoming second studio album. On July 8 and 9, she headlined the 2022 Wireless Festival in London and Birmingham. The song was first announced during a BET Awards 2022 commercial break. Cardi B worked with rapper GloRilla on the remix to her song "Tomorrow" titled "Tomorrow 2", which was released in September 2022. The remix peaked at number 9 on the Billboard Hot 100, becoming Cardi's eleventh top-ten single on the chart. HipHopDX listed it as the Best Hip-Hop Collaboration of 2022 while it was also the highest-listed by a female rapper on Billboard's 100 Best Songs of 2022 list. On October 1, Cardi B made a surprise appearance at the Inglewood show of Puerto Rican rapper Bad Bunny's concert tour, the World's Hottest Tour. In November, she signed with entertainment executive Irving Azoff's Full Stop Management. On December 3, 2022, she gave a 35-minute private performance at the Miami Art Basel for which she was paid $1 million. Also in December, the rapper featured on the remix of Spanish artist Rosalía's song, "Despechá".Cardi B appeared as a surprise performer at the New York City shows of SZA and GloRilla's tours: the SOS Tour and Anyways, Life's Great Tour, in early 2023. In March 2023, it was announced that Cardi B, along with Offset and two of their children, joined the voice cast of the children's animated film Baby Shark's Big Movie, set to be released on Paramount+ later this year. In April, she served as one of three headliners of the inaugural Rolling Loud Thailand festival in Pattaya, along with Travis Scott and Chris Brown. In June, she featured on "Put It on da Floor Again", the remix to rapper Latto's "Put It on da Floor". It peaked at number 13 on the Hot 100, becoming Cardi's 20th top-twenty single on the chart. On June 4, Cardi B headlined the 2023 Summer Jam festival in Elmont, New York. ln July, she featured on "Point Me 2", the remix to drill rapper FendiDa Rappa's single "Point Me to the Slut's". Her next collaboration was "Jealousy" with Offset, the lead single of his second solo album, Set It Off (2023), released later that month; it samples Three 6 Mafia's "Jealous Ass Bitches". Cardi released "Bongos" featuring Megan Thee Stallion on September 8, 2023, as the fourth single of her upcoming second studio album. The song marks the pair's second collaboration after "WAP" (2020). The music video, directed by Tanu Muino, cost over $2 million. "Bongos" reached number 14 in the US. Also in September, the rapper confirmed that her second studio album would be released in 2024—which was previously iterated for a 2023 release—and that a title was in the works. She revealed she was "just holding it" because she "[feels like she is] missing a couple of things" and "gotta make sure that everything is just planned out".


== Artistry ==


=== Influences ===
In Billboard's "You Should Know" series, Cardi B said the first albums she ever purchased were by American entertainers Missy Elliott and Tweet, respectively. She has credited Puerto Rican rapper Ivy Queen and Jamaican dancehall artist Spice as influences, as well as Beyoncé, Lady Gaga, Lil' Kim, Madonna, and Selena. She has mentioned Chicago drill music as an important influence. When asked about the initial direction for her music, Cardi B said in an interview, "When I first started rapping [...] I liked certain songs from Khia and Trina, and they [were] fighting songs. I haven't heard fighting songs for a very long time," crediting the two female rappers for her aggressive rap style. She continued, saying "a lot of girls they cannot afford red bottoms, a lot of girls they cannot afford foreign cars [...] but I know that every girl has beef with a girl [...] I know that every bitch don't like some bitch, and it's like 'that's what I wanna rap about.'" She also credits growing up in the South Bronx and real life experiences as influences for her songwriting; "I wouldn't be able to rap about the things that I rap about now [if I hadn't grown up there]."


=== Musical style ===
Her first studio album, Invasion of Privacy, is primarily a hip hop record, which comprises elements of trap, Latin music, and R&B. Consequence of Sound described her flow as "acrobatic and nimble." AllMusic editor David Jeffries called Cardi B "a raw and aggressive rapper". Stereogum called her voice "a full-bodied New Yawk nasal bleat, the sort of thing that you've heard if someone has ever told you that you stupid for taking too long at swiping your MetroCard." They continued to call her voice "an unabashedly loud and sexual fuck-you New York honk—that translates perfectly to rap."In a 2017 Complex article about her, the editor wrote "unapologetic does not begin to describe the totally unfiltered and sheer Cardi B-ness of Cardi B's personality. She's a hood chick who's not afraid to be hood no matter the setting. Cardi B is Cardi B 24/7, 365, this is why she resonates with people, and that same energy comes out in her music." Her flow has been described as aggressive In 2019, NME described her lyrics as "sexually free" performed with "rapid" flow, and other publications have further described her lyrics as outspoken, while her punchlines have been praised, by such publications as Pitchfork and The Source, as clever and quotable. She possesses a New York-Dominican accent.Cardi B has defended her musical content featuring sexually-charged lyrics—like most contemporary female rappers; she stated that the content "seems like that's what people want to hear", since she faced negative reactions after releasing her more emotional song, "Be Careful". She has declared, "[Drill music] is the type of artist I always wanted to be: I like to rap about the streets, and I like to rap about my pussy. I don't give a fuck about it." She has stated that writing and performing songs about her personal life and relationships initially caused her a "weird and uncomfortable" feeling and shyness.Cardi B employs different vocal styles in her music; in "WAP" her vocal performance has been described as "throaty" and "staccato", while in "Up" she raps with alliteration, a tongue twister-run, and "some classically comedic Cardi" punch lines.


== Other ventures ==
In February 2017, she partnered with M.A.C and Rio Uribe's Gypsy Sport for an event for New York Fashion Week. Her April appearance in i-D's "A-Z of Music" video was sponsored by designer Marc Jacobs, and she made the cover of The Fader's July/August 2017 Summer Music issue. Tom Ford's Cardi B-inspired lipstick, and named after her, was released in September 2018. It sold out within 24 hours. In November, she released a clothing line collection with Fashion Nova. The same month she partnered with Reebok, promoting the brand's Aztrek sneaker. In partnership with Reebok, she released a footwear and apparel collection in 2020, inspired by her personal style and paying homage to "classic 80s styling" and motifs. She released her second collection with Reebok in 2021, titled "Let Me Be...In My World", comprising sneakers, tracksuits and corsets, inspired by everyday life in New York City. The third collection with the brand, "Mommy & Me", was released in May 2021 in recognition of Mother's Day, which includes Cardi's iteration of Club C shoes for adults, children, and infants. The next, titled "Let Me Be...Enchanted" was released in two parts in June and July 2022; it was revealed to be inspired by "a state of enchantment and euphoria" and included crop tops, faux fur jackets, and leotards along with footwear. The fifth and final collection, "Let Me Be...Next Level Energy", was also released in two parts in September and December 2022, concluding her four-year partnership with Reebok. Inspired by Cardi B's "unmatched energy", the collection consisted of bodysuits, crop tops, footwear, leggings,  and woven jackets—of a color palette based on crystals.Cardi B teamed up with Pepsi for three television commercials, which aired during the Super Bowl LIII, the 61st Annual Grammy Awards, and Christmas. In early 2019, Cardi also joined other hip hop artists (including her husband Offset, as part of Migos) in releasing her flavors of snack food Rap Snacks: two flavors of chips, and two of popcorn. The bags' artwork were designed by Jai Manselle and inspired by the cover of Invasion of Privacy.She premiered the series Cardi Tries via Facebook Messenger in December 2020, with herself as one of the executive producers. The web series ran for three seasons until 2023.In December 2021, Cardi B partnered with PLBY Group Inc. as creative director in residence for Playboy and founding member of Centerfold, a creator-driven website in the works. The partnership also includes fashion and sexual-wellness products. In collaboration with Starco Brands, she launched a vodka-infused, vegan whipped cream "Whipshots" the same month. It has sold over two million cans as of March 2023.In February 2023, Cardi B and Offset partnered with McDonald's to create the Cardi B and Offset meal which was launched on Valentine's Day. The meal was first announced in the 2023 McDonald's Super Bowl commercial which the couple appeared in.


=== Philanthropy ===
In 2022, Cardi B donated $100,000 to the elementary school she attended, I.S. 232 in The Bronx.


== Public image ==


=== Political statements ===
Cardi B identifies as a feminist. The rapper has been called "unabashedly, directly political" and often uses social media to advocate for causes she believes in, such as gun control. During the 2016 presidential primaries, she warned her fans of President Trump's immigration policies and encouraged them to vote for Senator Bernie Sanders. At the Grammy Awards in 2018, she appeared in a video along with Hillary Clinton to narrate a portion of Fire and Fury, Michael Wolff's insider's account of Trump's administration, and stated "Why am I even reading this shit? I can't believe this. I can't believe—this is how he really lives his life?"Early in 2018 she used her social media to demand transparency on tax policy, asking for detailed information on how her taxpayer dollars are being spent in New York state and criticizing the maintenance of its streets, prisons, and public transportation. Cardi B endorsed Sanders once again in his second bid for the presidency in the 2020 United States presidential election, while praising U.S. Representative Tim Ryan. She stated that one of the reasons for her endorsement is Sanders' long-time involvement in supporting underprivileged minorities and "people getting Medicare because he knows they can't afford it," while Politico argued that she "might be one of Bernie's most powerful 2020 allies."She has used her social pages to raise awareness for victims of police brutality, and has encouraged people to vote for mayors, judges and district attorneys in local elections. In a conversation with Democratic candidate Joe Biden for Elle, they discussed Medicare, free college tuition, and racial equality. According to a study published by The Hollywood Reporter, Cardi B ranked as the fifth most influential celebrity, and fourth among Generation Z, for the 2020 presidential election.She has praised President Franklin D. Roosevelt for advocating for the Social Security program and the New Deal project. She said of President Roosevelt, "he helped us get over the Depression, all while he was in a wheelchair. Like, this man was suffering from polio at the time of his presidency, and yet all he was worried about was trying to make America great—make America great again for real. He's the real 'Make America Great Again,' because if it wasn't for him, old people wouldn't even get Social Security." Sanders has praised her for her "leading role" in calling attention to Social Security.


=== Fashion ===
Cardi has a noted affinity for Christian Louboutin heels, a running theme in her song "Bodak Yellow". She has also mentioned her affinity for cheap, fast fashion brands stating "I don't care if it cost $20 or $15. If it looks good on me, it looks good on me". During an interview in early 2017, Cardi B spoke on being rejected by some fashion designers. Cardi wore vintage Thierry Mugler to the 2019 Grammy Awards, with an i-D article stating that the fashion house's "resurgence onto the fashion scene can almost single-handedly be attributed" to the Swarovski crystal-embroidered crinoline sheath gown she wore at the ceremony.Mugler's collaboration with Cardi B marked the second time in 25 years that the Paris house opened its archives to dress a celebrity, the first being Beyoncé for her 2009 concert tour. W magazine credited the "WAP" music video for popularizing the Mugler bodysuit in the mainstream. Cardi has acknowledged Mugler as one of the first designers to "take a major chance on [her]" for their fashion collaborations.Vogue, The Telegraph, Time, and Vibe have referred to her as a fashion icon. An article from Vogue noted she "is famous for her statement getups—whether she's rocking archival Mugler on the red carpet, or dripping in Chanel while sitting courtside at a basketball game." Her over-the-top manicures, designed by nail artist Jenny Bui and studded with Swarovski crystals, has become a part of her signature look. Editor Christian Allaire from the magazine in 2021 commented that her signature "bold" ensembles "create a spectacle" during fashion weeks.In 2018, she became the first female rapper in the US to appear on the cover of Vogue magazine. Photographed by Annie Leibovitz, the cover, one of four for the January 2019 issue that included Stella McCartney, features her in a red and white Michael Kors dress and matching red Jimmy Choo shoes, while holding her daughter, Kulture.In 2019, the Council of Fashion Designers of America included her on their list of "28 Black Fashion Forces". Vogue editor-in-chief Anna Wintour commended her fashion sense, declaring that she "completely rethought [her] opinion of Cardi B's style" after the 2019 Met Gala, where the rapper wore a Thom Browne-designed burgundy gown that extends outward in concentric circles for about ten feet and was inspired by the female form.Cardi B became the face of Balenciaga's ad campaign for the winter 2020 season. The campaign includes billboards in several international locations, such as the Louvre museum. Vogue's Brooke Bobb commented, "This is Cardi's first campaign for a luxury fashion house, though she's definitely no stranger to the Parisian style scene", citing her floral printed Richard Quinn ensemble "that literally covered her from head to toe" and her being "a front row fixture" at high fashion shows, adding, "She and her stylist Kollin Carter have been wildly successful in carving out a much-needed space for Cardi within the fashion industry, and they've cultivated a personal style that is all her own while being inspiring to all".In 2020, Cardi B became the first female rapper to be awarded by the FN Achievement Awards when she won the Style Influencer of the Year award, which was presented to her by Christian Louboutin. In a press release for the awards show, she was called an "influence just about everything in pop culture—from music, fashion and style to social media, politics and even public service". In 2022, Rolling Stone ranked her as the second most-stylish woman in music, behind Lady Gaga, and GQ considered her "one of fashion's preeminent risk-takers."


== Impact ==
Cardi B has been referred to as the "Reigning Queen of Hip Hop" by multiple publications, including Billboard, The Hollywood Reporter, Entertainment Weekly, Omaha World-Herald, Black Enterprise, Newsweek, and The A.V. Club, and as the "Queen of Rap" by NME, Essence, Harper's Bazaar Malaysia, The Jakarta Post, Uproxx, iHeartRadio, Geo TV, Vanity Fair, Joe, Boston Herald, Refinery 29, France 24, and Nigerian media The Guardian,  BBC News, and Daily Trust.Spin staff credited her for opening "the table to a new generation of pop artists remaking American music in their own image and accents," as Cardi B "recognized that POC artists no longer need to pander or soften themselves in order to become household names." Billboard editors stated that with "Bodak Yellow"'s commercial success, "she left an indelible mark on the summer of 2017, not only because she rewrote history, but she gave hope to the have nots...". Several publications have credited "I Like It", the first Latin trap song to reach number one on the Hot 100, for introducing the "musical movement" to a mainstream, massive audience. Billboard's Carl Lamarre considered "WAP"'s achievements "a clever Trojan horse for the myriad ways Cardi influences the culture with every move she makes."The Wall Street Journal's Neil Shah stated in 2020 that her breakthrough and success influenced "today's female-rap renaissance," while Genius staff credited her for "helping jumpstart a new wave of female hip-hop signings and promotion at labels," and NPR Music commented that the "renaissance" of the dynamism of women in rap grew "in enthusiasm and breadth" since Cardi's "first historic run" in 2017. Similarly, Clover Hope's book The Motherlode (2021) stated that Invasion of Privacy "jump-started a new era for women rappers in which success felt much more tangible" as Cardi B "multiplied the wealth of talent and resurrected the idea that numerous women who controlled their own stories could dominate rap at once."The New Yorker has credited her for "changing a genre that has rarely allowed for more than one female superstar at a time." Uproxx noted Cardi B for promoting up-and-coming female rappers; "[she is] choosing to use her position at the height of stardom to open doors for other women to flourish in hip-hop at a greater level than any since the Golden Era and 'Ladies First'," considering it "something of a departure from tradition; for the decade previous to Cardi's precipitous come-up, it seemed hip-hop had an unspoken, Highlander-esque rule in place regarding women." Variety deemed her a "hip-hop icon", and The Independent called her "the people's pop culture icon", writing that she "has become one of the most recognisable cultural figures of the past 10 years".NPR defined "Cardi B effect" as "a branding power rooted in specific authenticity, created and permeated by rapper Cardi B" and noticed that with her breakthrough, "brands finally started to become hip to [her] effect, noticing the cultural markers outside of the rap world that were proving it wasn't limited to clubs, concerts and radio." Business magazine Inc. stated that her success "shows how social media changed everything we knew about traditional marketing and media", which no longer relies on a "well-thought marketing scheme or millions of dollars in advertising." In 2019, a life-sized sculpture of her was on display at the Brooklyn Museum, as part of Spotify's RapCaviar "Pantheon".Bloomberg reported that her data bill helped to boost Ghana's GDP growth in 2019, after it was part of a concert tour. She inspired the creation of the sitcom Partners in Rhyme, executively produced by MC Lyte about a young woman in high school who "aspires to be the next Cardi B." P-Valley creator and executive producer Katori Hall cited her an inspiration for the TV series, and credited her for "helping prepare the public" for its storyline.Several artists have cited Cardi B's work as an inspiration, including Rosalía, Olivia Rodrigo, Jazmine Sullivan, Selena Gomez, Blackpink, Spice, Greta Gerwig, Nathy Peluso, Rubi Rose, María Becerra, and Abigail Asante. Cardi B has been credited for supporting and uniting female rappers in the industry, with a writer from Uproxx considering her co-sign "the new Drake effect" for women in hip hop.


== Achievements ==

Cardi B is the recipient of numerous accolades, including a Grammy Award, eight Billboard Music Awards (including three consecutive Top Rap Female Artist wins), six Guinness World Records, six American Music Awards, four MTV Video Music Awards, six BET Awards (including Album of the Year), and fourteen BET Hip Hop Awards. Invasion of Privacy—which made her the first female rapper to win the Grammy Award for Best Rap Album as a solo artist—became the first female rap album in fifteen years to be nominated for a Grammy Award for Album of the Year.Time included her on their annual list of the 100 most influential people in the world in 2018. She received the ASCAP award for Songwriter of the Year in 2019, becoming the first female rapper to win the award. She received the honor for the second time in 2020, making her the first female songwriter to win the award twice. In 2020, Cardi B became the first female rapper to be named Woman of the Year at the Billboard Women in Music Awards.Cardi B is the female rapper with the most Billboard Hot 100 number one singles (5) and the one with the most total weeks on the top position (16). "I Like It" became the first song led by a female rapper to surpass a billion streams on Spotify, making her the first woman in hip hop with multiple billion-streamers on the service, with a total of three so far. With the singles "Taki Taki" and "WAP" she became the only female rapper to top the global Spotify chart multiple times. Since August 2020, "WAP" holds the record of the biggest first-week streams for a song in the United States. Invasion of Privacy was the top female rap album of the 2010s, according to the Billboard 200 decade-end chart. It became the longest-charting album by a female rapper on the Billboard 200, and the most-streamed female rap album on Spotify.Cardi is the female rapper with the most Diamond-certified songs by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) (3): "Bodak Yellow", which made her the first female rapper to have a song certified Diamond; "Girls Like You", which made her the only female rapper to achieve multiple Diamond-certified songs; and "I Like It", a tie for the most among women artists. Cardi B has topped twice Pitchfork's annual list of best songs of the year (2017 and 2020). Billboard staff and Rolling Stone ranked her debut album number 13 and 34 on their critics' lists of the best albums of the 2010s respectively, both the highest rank for a female rapper for the decade. Cardi B has become the highest-certified female rapper of all time on the RIAA's Top Artists (Digital Singles) ranking, with 54 million certified units, also being among the highest-certified female artists overall. In October, 2022, five years after her major-label debut, she reached 100 million units sold in RIAA certifications, across her album, singles and guest appearances.In the US, Cardi has achieved three times the best-performing song of the year by a female artist—the first act to do so this century—in 2017, 2018, and 2020. As of 2021, "I Like It" is the most-streamed song by a female rapper in the United Kingdom. In August 2021, "Bodak Yellow" made Cardi B the only female rapper to have two videos on her YouTube channel with more than 1 billion views, joining "I Like It", and became the fastest solo female rap song to reach that mark on the platform. Cardi is the only female rapper ranked on Billboard's Greatest Hot 100 Hits of All Time, with "Girls Like You" at number 30.


== Personal life ==
Cardi B defined herself as a practicing Catholic. In 2016 Cardi B said that, while working as a stripper during her younger years, she used to drug and rob men to get money. Following controversies on the matter, sparked in 2019, she defended herself by saying that she took money from them because they "wasted her time by falling asleep", and then "kept coming back."She identifies as bisexual. In connection with the Me Too movement, she has discussed being sexually assaulted in the past while working as a stripper.
In a 2018 interview, Cardi B talked about being Afro-Latina and Afro-Caribbean:We are Caribbean people. [...] Some people want to decide if you're black or not, depending on your skin complexion, because they don't understand Caribbean people or our culture. [...] I don't got to tell you that I'm black. I expect you to know about it. When my father taught me about Caribbean countries, he told me that Europeans took over our lands. That's why we all speak different languages. [...] Just like everybody else, we came over here the same way. I hate when people try to take my roots from me. Because we know that there's African roots inside of us.


=== Relationships ===
As of early 2017, Cardi B began dating fellow rapper Offset. They became engaged on October 27, 2017. On April 7, 2018, during her second performance on Saturday Night Live, Cardi B revealed her pregnancy; she was about six months (24 weeks) pregnant at the time. On June 25, 2018, TMZ found a marriage license revealing Cardi B and Offset had actually secretly married in September 2017, one month before the public proposal. She later confirmed this in a social media post.Cardi B gave birth to her daughter on July 10, 2018. In December 2018, she announced on Instagram that she and Offset had separated, though the pair later reunited. In February 2019, the couple made a public appearance for the Grammys. He accompanied her onstage during her acceptance speech for Best Rap Album.In September 2020, it was reported that Cardi B had filed for divorce from Offset, but the following month it was revealed they were back together. In June 2021, Cardi B revealed she was pregnant with her second child, a boy. She gave birth to her son on September 4, 2021. On the fifth anniversary of her marriage, Cardi B announced she is planning her official wedding.


=== Legal issues ===
On October 1, 2018, Cardi B was accused of an alleged assault of two female bartenders. The victims claimed that Cardi B and her entourage "threw bottles and alcohol at them." She denied involvement. She was charged with two misdemeanors: assault and reckless endangerment. Cardi B appeared in court for her arraignment on December 7, 2018, after she did not show up for the originally scheduled date due to a scheduling conflict, according to her attorney. On June 21, 2019, a jury indicted Cardi B on 14 charges, including two counts of felony assault with intent to cause serious physical injury, stemming from the incident. She was arraigned on June 25, 2019, and pleaded not guilty on all charges. On September 15, 2022, she pleaded guilty to third-degree assault and second-degree reckless endangerment, resulting in a sentence of 15 days of community service.On January 24, 2022,  Cardi won a million-dollar defamation verdict against YouTuber Latasha Kebe (Tasha K) for waging a "malicious campaign" to hurt her reputation by posting false rumors. She stated that the lies had led her to contemplate suicide in 2019. The jury issued a verdict that Cardi B had been defamed and awarded $1.25 million in damages. Further proceedings brought the total fine against Kebe to $3.82 million.On March 25, 2022, Cardi, her sister Hennessy, and Hennessy's girlfriend won a defamation lawsuit filed against them by three men over an incident at a Suffolk County beach.


=== Controversies ===
Cardi B sparked controversy after throwing one of her high heel shoes at and attempting to physically attack fellow rapper Nicki Minaj at a New York Fashion Week after-party in September 2018. Following the altercation, she alleged that Minaj had previously "liked" social media comments that spoke negatively of Cardi B's ability to take care of her newborn daughter. Minaj denied the allegations, and accused Cardi B of cyberbullying in a heated Instagram exchange from 2014. Cardi B was on the cover of the 2019 spring fashion issue of Harper's Bazaar, which featured her in a Cinderella-themed photo shoot wearing a red gown and leaving a shoe behind. Some interpreted this as a reference to the incident.After the release of "Girls" in May 2018, a collaboration where she had a featured verse, Cardi B responded to accusations of the song trivializing and sexualizing LGBT relationships; she tweeted, "We never try to cause harm or had bad intentions with the song." She went on to add, "I personally myself had experiences with other women."


== Discography ==

Invasion of Privacy (2018)


== Filmography ==


=== Commercials ===


== See also ==
Afro-Caribbean music
Black Hispanic and Latino Americans
LGBT culture in New York City
List of self-identifying LGBTQ New Yorkers
List of highest-certified music artists in the United States
List of artists who reached number one in the United States
Dominican Americans
Hispanics and Latinos in New York
List of most-followed Instagram accounts


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Hope, Clover (2021). The Motherlode: 100+ Women Who Made Hip-Hop. Harry N. Abrams. ISBN 978-1-4197-4296-5.


== External links ==

Official website 
Cardi B at AllMusic
Cardi B discography at Discogs
Cardi B at IMDb
Cardi B discography at MusicBrainzCarl McCormick (born June 26, 1988), professionally known as Cardiak, is an American record producer from Willingboro Township, New Jersey. He began producing music in 2008 and is known for his work with closely associated artists such as Ace Hood, J. Cole, Drake, Joe Budden, G-Unit/Lloyd Banks, Freeway, DJ Khaled, Rick Ross, Meek Mill, Trina, Red Cafe, Boosie Badazz, Wale, Fabolous, D-Block, Dr. Dre, among others.


== Career ==
Cardiak received notoriety for his first major placement in 2010 for his production of Lloyd Banks' underground hit single "Start It Up", featuring Kanye West, Ryan Leslie, Swizz Beatz and Fabolous, featured on Banks' third studio album, The Hunger for More 2, accompanied by his two other contributions as producer, "Take Em to War" (featuring Tony Yayo, Banks' fellow G-Unit member) and "Unexplainable" (featuring Styles P). Start It Up peaked at position 52 on the Billboard Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs list.Cardiak received his first Grammy award nomination in 2013 for Best Rap Album, because of his production of "Amsterdam" and "Diced Pineapples" (featuring Drake and Wale) for rapper Rick Ross' fifth studio album, God Forgives, I Don't, which was released on July 31, 2012, and peaked at number–one on the Billboard 200. In early 2015, Cardiak won his first Grammy for Best Rap Album for his production of "Groundhog Day" for the deluxe edition of Eminem's eighth studio album, The Marshall Mathers LP 2, released on November 9, 2013.


== Production discography ==


=== 2008 ===


==== Joe Budden – Halfway House ====
08. "The Soul"


==== Freeway – Month of Madness ====
07. "Mindstate Takeover"
12. "Straight Madness"
28. "NP Finest"
30. "Back for More"


=== 2009 ===


==== Lloyd Banks – The Cold Corner ====
05. "On My Way" (co-produced with Dilemma)


==== Havoc – From Now On ====
02. "Whats That Smell"
04. "Thats How You Feel"
15. "Sex Tape"


==== Lil Twist – The Yearbook ====
12. "I'ma Do Me"
15. "King"


==== Lola Monroe – Art Of Motivation ====
12. "Make A Way"
15. "Art Of Motivation"
23. "Divas Gettin' Money" (featuring Rasheeda)
35. "Bout Me"


==== Ace Hood – Street Certified ====
11. "Takeover"


==== Ace Hood – Ruthless ====
11. "Bout Me" (featuring Ballgreezy)


==== Lil Twist – Class President ====
07. "Forever"


==== Lola Monroe – The Untouchables ====
06. "Crazy World" (featuring Lil Boosie)
13. "Love Me"


=== 2010 ===


==== Mike Knox – Money Machine ====
04. "They Say I Got Issues"
07. "Let It Rock" (remix; featuring Red Cafe and Beanie Sigel)


==== Meek Mill – Mr. Philadelphia ====
04. "Hate Is My Motivator"
09. "This Is How We Do It" (featuring Beanie Sigel, Mel Love, and Mike Knox)
12. "Ain't Gonna Sleep"
15. "Hardbody" (featuring Peedi Crakk and Shizz Nitti)


==== Lloyd Banks – The Hunger for More 2 ====
01. "Take Em To War" (featuring Tony Yayo)
02. "Unexplainable" (featuring Styles P)
08. "Start It Up" (featuring Kanye West, Swizz Beatz, Fabolous and Ryan Leslie)


=== 2011 ===


==== USDA – CTE Or Nothing ====
03. "Off Safety"


==== Red Cafe – Above The Clouds ====
07. "The Realest" (featuring Lloyd Banks and Fabolous)
08. "Big In The Hood"
12. "We Get It On" (featuring Omarion)


==== Maybach Music Group – Self Made Vol. 1 ====
03. "600 Benz" (Wale and Rick Ross featuring Jadakiss)
07. "Rise" Pill, Wale & Teedra Moses featuring Cyhi Da Prynce and Currensy)


==== Fabolous – 'The S.O.U.L. Tape (Mixtape) ====
08. "Y'all Don't Hear Me Tho" (featuring Red Cafe)


==== Ace Hood – Body Bag Vol.1 ====
10. "Just Living"
11. "Real Big"


==== Tory Lanez – Swavey (Mixtape) ====
"Slept On You" (featuring Bun B)


==== Kid Ink – Daydreamer ====
00."My City" (featuring.Killa Kyleon, Red Cafe & Machine Gun Kelly)


==== Cory Gunz – Son Of A Gun (Mixtape) ====
13.Sh*t Ain't A Game (featuring Pop Dolla$)
17.Bedtime
22.Sick 'Em (Feat. Kid Ink & Gudda Gudda)


==== Ace Hood – Blood, Sweat & Tears ====
07."Letter to My Ex's"
11."Spoke to My Momma"
16."Real Big"


==== Triple C's – Money Burning Mother****er (Mixtape) ====
00."Fly ****"


==== P.L. – The Turning Lane ====
"U Mad"


==== Meek Mill – Dreamchasers (Mixtape) ====
15. "Sparkle" (featuring Young Pooh)
17. "Y'all Don't Really Hear Me Tho Freestyle"


==== DJ Drama – Third Power ====
3. "Lay Low" (feat. (Young Chris, Meek Mill and Freeway)


==== Young Chris & Cardiak – The Revival (Mixtape) ====
All tracks


==== Ace Hood – The Statement 2 (Mixtape) ====
11. "Pay Her Bills"


=== 2012 ===


==== French Montana & Coke Boys – Coke Boys 3 (Mixtape) ====
05. "Headquarters" (featuring Red Cafe)


==== Meek Mill – Dreamchasers 2 (Mixtape) ====
09. "Everyday"
11. "Lean Wit It"


==== Maybach Music Group – Self Made Vol. 2 ====
06. "Fountain of Youth" Stalley & Rick Ross featuring Nipsey Hussle
13. "Fluorescent Ink" Wale, Stalley & Rick Ross


==== Bow Wow – Underrated ====
02. "Where My Dogs At"
05. "We Going Hard" (feat. Ace Hood)


==== Lloyd Banks – V.6: The Gift ====
11. "Live It Up"
14. "Show And Prove"


==== Rick Ross – God Forgives, I Don't ====
07. "Amsterdam"
14. "Diced Pineapples" (feat. Wale and Drake)


==== DJ Drama – Quality Street Music ====
02. "Never Die" (feat. Jadakiss, Cee Lo Green, Nipsey Hussle and Young Jeezy)


==== Ryan Leslie – Les Is More ====
12. "The Black Flag"


==== Meek Mill – Dreams & Nightmares ====
12. "Polo & Shell Tops"


==== T.I – Trouble Man: Heavy is the Head ====
02. "G Season" (feat. Meek Mill; co-produced with Chinky P.)


==== Joe Budden – A Loose Quarter ====
4. "Cut From a Different Cloth" (feat. Ab-Soul; co-produced by CritaCal)
13. "All In My Head" (feat. Royce Da 5'9" and Kobe Honeycutt)
14. "More Of Me" (feat. Emanny)


=== 2013 ===


==== Casey Veggies – Life Changes ====
6. "Life$tyle"


==== Wale – The Gifted ====
08. "Bricks" (feat. Yo Gotti & Lyfe Jennings)


==== Ace Hood – Trials & Tribulations ====
03. "Another Statistic"
14. "Mama" (featuring Betty Wright; produced with CritaCal)
17. "Have Mercy" (Deluxe edition bonus track)


==== Ryan Leslie – Black Mozart ====
02. "Black Mozart"
04. "History"
09. "Green" (feat. Fabolous)
12. "Coke Cans" (co-produced by Ryan Leslie; additional production by Gabe Lambirth)


==== Joe Budden – No Love Lost ====
05. "You & I" featuring Emanny
07. "All In My Head" featuring Royce da 5'9" and Kobe
09. "Switch Positions" featuring Omarion
12. "No Love Lost Outro"


==== The Game – OKE: Operation Kill Everything ====
01. "Kill Everything" (feat. Diddy; co-produced by CritaCal)


==== Eminem – The Marshall Mathers LP 2 ====
03. "Groundhog Day" (Deluxe edition bonus track; co-produced by Frank Dukes and Eminem; additional keyboards by Luis Resto)


=== 2014 ===


==== Kid Ink – My Own Lane ====
12. "I Don't Care" ft Maejor Ali (co-produced by Larance Dopson of 1500 or Nothin')


==== Rick Ross – Hood Billionaire ====
15. "Family Ties" (co-produced by CritaCal)


==== J. Cole – 2014 Forest Hills Drive ====
12. "Love Yourz" (produced with Illmind and CritaCal)


=== 2015 ===


==== Trey Songz – Intermission I & II ====
04. "Do It Now" (produced with Hitmaka and Young 'N Fly)


==== Dr. Dre – Compton ====
09. "Deep Water" (feat. Kendrick Lamar, Justus and Anderson .Paak; co-produced with Dr. Dre, Focus..., Dem Jointz and DJ Dahi)
12. "For the Love of Money" (feat. Jon Connor, Jill Scott and Anderson .Paak)


==== Scarface – Deeply Rooted ====
16. "Exit Plan" (feat. Akon; Deluxe edition bonus track)


==== Fabolous – Summertime Shootout ====
03. "Doin' It Well" (feat. Trey Songz and Nicki Minaj; co-produced by CritaCal)


==== Jeremih – Late Nights ====
14. "Worthy" (feat. Jhené Aiko; co-produced by Hitmaka)


=== 2016 ===


==== Macklemore & Ryan Lewis – This Unruly Mess I've Made ====
08. "Need to Know" (featuring Chance the Rapper; co-produced by CritiCal)


==== Drake – Views ====
08. "With You" (featuring PartyNextDoor; produced by Murda Beatz; co-produced by Nineteen85; additional production by Cardiak)


==== J. Cole – 4 Your Eyez Only ====
02. "Immortal" (produced with Frank Dukes; additional production by J. Cole)


=== 2017 ===


==== Trey Songz – Tremaine: The Album ====
14. "Picture Perfect"


=== Phora – Yours Truly Forever ===
07. "Forever" (produced with Eskupe & Anthro Beats)


=== 2020 ===


==== T.I. – The L.I.B.R.A. ====
06. "Moon Juice" (with Snoop Dogg featuring Jeremih)


=== 2021 ===


==== Jazmine Sullivan – Heaux Tales ====
06. "On It" (featuring Ari Lennox; produced with Wu10)


== Unsorted ==


=== Mike Knox (2009) ===
"Let it Rock" (featuring Beanie Sigel)


=== Audio Push (2010) ===
"Got it Goin' on"


=== Havoc (2010) ===
"Thats How You Feel (Remix)" (featuring Nyce Da Future & Cory Gunz)


=== Lola Monroe (2010) ===
"Overtime" (featuring Trina)


=== Reed Dollaz (2010) ===
"I Be On That Money" (featuring Peedi Crakk & Eness)


=== Meek Mill (2010) ===
"Let's Get It" (featuring Kre Forch)


=== Mistah F.A.B. (2010) ===
"She Don't Belong To Me" (featuring London)


=== 50 Cent (2011) ===
"Outlaw"


=== Kid Ink (2011) ===
"Insane"
"Tats On My Face"
"Here We Go"


=== Young Jeezy (2011) ===
"Off Safety" (featuring USDA)


=== Young Chris (2011) ===
"Flatline" (featuring Lloyd Banks)


=== Mike Knox (2011) ===
"Get Gully" (featuring 50 Cent & Freeway)


=== Ace Hood (2012) ===
"The Trailer" (produced with Frank Dukes)


=== Slaughterhouse (2013) ===
"Party" (co-produced by Just Blaze)


=== Dave East (2017) ===
"Paper Chasin'" (featuring ASAP Ferg)


=== Chris Brown (2019) ===
"Come Together" (featuring H.E.R.)


=== H.E.R. (2021) ===
"Damage"
"Come Through" (featuring Chris Brown)


== Singles ==


=== Lloyd Banks – The Hunger for More 2 (2010) ===
08. "Start It Up" (feat. Kanye West, Fabolous, Swizz Beatz and Ryan Leslie)


=== Maybach Music Group – Self Made Vol. 1 (2011) ===
03. "600 Benz" (Wale and Rick Ross featuring Jadakiss)


=== Lloyd Banks – TBA (2011) ===
00. "Check Me Out"


=== P.L. – The Turning Lane (2011) ===
"U Mad"


=== Paypa – Feel Good Music (Unreleased) ===
"Time Zone" feat. French Montana


== References ==Caswell Senior (born October 27, 1986), known professionally as Casanova, is an Haitian-American rapper. In 2016, Casanova made his first original song "Don't Run". He is signed to Roc Nation. In 2020, he was indicted on RICO charges alongside 17 others due to various criminal activities which his Bloods gang "Untouchable Gorilla Stone Nation," allegedly participated in.


== Early life ==
Caswell Senior was born and raised in Brooklyn, New York. He is of Jamaican, Haitian and Panamanian descent. At age 18, he was imprisoned on Rikers Island, where he formed a close bond with his cellmate, who was later discovered to be rapper ASAP Rocky.


== Career ==
While in a studio with friends in early 2016, Casanova, without previous experience, came up with "Don't Run". The song was produced by U-Dub (of NY Bangers). Upon its release "Don't Run" received heavy radio play from DJ Self on Power 105.1 in New York City, and later also Power 105.1 and Hot 97 there. In June 2016, Casanova released the official video for "Don't Run". Casanova was discovered by Memphis Bleek through his label, Warehouse Music Group, which is under Jay-Z's record label Roc Nation. In October 2016, Casanova officially signed his deal with Warehouse/Roc Nation. In September 2016, Casanova released the single "Line Me" as well as a freestyle to Mobb Deep's "Quiet Storm".In 2017, Casanova released "Don't Run" Remix featuring Young M.A, Fabolous, Dave East & Don Q.
He continued to put out music, releasing "The Old 50", followed by his mixtape tape album  "Be Safe Tho" featuring Chris Brown and LO on the song "OHB". On February 8, 2018, he released "Set Trippin" which addressed his beef with fellow New York artist 
Tekashi69. He performed on the Party Tour with Chris Brown, 50 Cent, French Montana, Fabolous, O.T. Genasis and Kap G. On June 29, 2018, Casanova released his debut EP Commissary with guest appearances from G-Eazy, Rich the Kid, Snap Dogg, A Boogie wit da Hoodie and Mozzy.


== Legal issues ==
On December 1, 2020, prosecutors from the Southern District of New York Federal Court declared a warrant for the arrest of Casanova who they alleged was a leader within the Untouchable Gorilla Stone Nation Gang. He was among 18 alleged members of the Untouchable Gorilla Stone Nation Gang charged in connection with various racketeering, murder, narcotics, firearms and fraud offenses, officials said. The Acting U.S. Attorney Audrey Strauss said: "As alleged in the Indictment, members of Gorilla Stone committed terrible acts of violence, trafficked in narcotics, and even engaged in brazen fraud by exploiting benefits programs meant to provide assistance in response to the COVID-19 pandemic". The FBI apprehended 17 of the gang members, but Casanova was not detained and an arrest warrant was issued for him. On December 2, 2020, Casanova surrendered to federal authorities. On June 27, 2023, he was sentenced to 188 months (15 years, 8 months) in prison.


== Tour ==
The Party Tour (2017)


== 2x Entertainment ==
In 2016, Casanova started his own company called 2x Entertainment. On October 20, 2017, 2x Entertainment's partnership with Warehouse Music Group/Roc Nation was publicly announced by Casanova and Memphis Bleek in an interview with The Breakfast Club on Power 105.1. In November 2017, Casanova brought Lamont Sincere to the 2x Entertainment team as an artist.


=== Artists ===
Casanova
Jah Dwella
Brash
P Racks
Lamont Sincere
Gallardo
Louski
Klass Murda


=== Producers ===
Lamont Sincere


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===


=== EPs ===


=== Singles ===


=== Mixtapes ===
"Be Safe Tho" (2017)


=== Guest appearances ===
Maino (featuring Phresher, Casanova, and Lola Brooke) – "Doing Well" (2017)
Problem (featuring 1TakeJay, Casanova, and Saviii 3rd) – "F*ck Me Too" (2018)
Papoose (featuring Casanova) – "Shooter" (2018)
DJ Premier (featuring Casanova) – "Wut U Said?" (2018)
50 Cent (featuring Casanova, Uncle Murda, 6ix9ine) "Get The Strap" (2018)


== References ==


== External links ==Barry Adrian Reese (born July 7, 1982), better known by his stage name Cassidy, is an American rapper from Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. He is perhaps best known for his singles "Hotel" (featuring R. Kelly), "Get No Better" (featuring Mashonda), "I'm a Hustla", "B-Boy Stance", and "My Drink n My 2 Step" (featuring Swizz Beatz).
Cassidy first garnered attention for his freestyles and competitions as a battle rapper in the late 1990s. American record producer Swizz Beatz found Cassidy in 2002 and signed him to his Full Surface Records imprint under Ruff Ryders Entertainment and J Records, which helped him gain major recognition. He rose to prominence with his debut studio album Split Personality, which was released in March 2004 and debuted at number two on the US Billboard 200.


== Musical career ==


=== 2002–05: Split Personality and I'm a Hustla ===

In 2002, Cassidy signed a recording contract with American music producer Swizz Beatz's Full Surface imprint, under the aegis of Ruff Ryders Entertainment and J Records. On November 29, 2003, he released his commercial debut single, "Hotel", featuring R. Kelly. The song reached the Top 10 of the US Billboard Hot 100 chart. The second single, "Get No Better", features Mashonda. On March 16, 2004, Cassidy released his debut album, Split Personality. It was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA), the following month.On April 15, 2005, Cassidy released the single "I'm a Hustla". The next single, "B-Boy Stance", features vocals and production from his mentor, Swizz Beatz. On June 28, 2005, Cassidy released his second studio album, I'm a Hustla. It debuted at number five on the US Billboard 200 chart, with 93,000 copies sold in the first week.


=== 2006–11: B.A.R.S. and C.A.S.H. ===

In 2006, after his release from prison and recovering from an auto wreck, Cassidy began work on his third studio album, B.A.R.S. The Barry Adrian Reese Story. The album was released on November 6, 2007, debuting at number 10 on the Billboard 200, with 63,000 copies sold in the first week. The album was led by the single "My Drink n My 2 Step", featuring vocals and production from Swizz Beatz.
In late 2009, Cassidy signed with Carmelo Anthony's label Kross Over Entertainment. While preparing his fourth studio album, he released a mixtape series entitled Apply Pressure. On August 24, 2010, Cassidy released the five-track EP Face 2 Face, with the promotional single "Face 2 Face". On November 16, 2010, Cassidy's fourth studio album, C.A.S.H. (Cass a Straight Hustla) was released. On its first week it had sold about 5,200 copies, much lower than his previous studio albums. "Drumma Bass" was the only official single from the album.


=== 2012–present: Mr. Hip-Hop and Da Science ===
On May 21, 2012, Cassidy hosted a release party for his mixtape Mayhem Music. On July 8, 2012, he released the mixtape Mayhem Music: AP3. After fellow Philly rapper Meek Mill said he would battle Cassidy, which Cassidy later said he would accept if the money was right. They participated in a "twitter beef" after which Cassidy released "The Diary of a Hustla" which was originally thought to be a diss towards Meek. This was later refuted by Cassidy. They both were asking for $100,000 each for the battle to take place. However, after Meek Mill dissed Cassidy's song "Condom Style" (a remake of Psy's "Gangnam Style") Cassidy released a song titled "Me, Myself & iPhone" where he took shots at Meek Mill. Afterwards, Meek Mill responded with the diss track "Repo" which Mill later said would be the final diss record he would release against Cassidy. Cassidy later said the feud was not personal, saying it was all in the spirit of hip hop. On January 6, 2013, Cassidy released a 10-minute-long diss response titled "Raid". On October 6, Cassidy released his album Da Science.


== Other ventures ==
In 2007, Cassidy signed a deal as the "new face" for Lot 29's fall clothing line. In 2009, Cassidy appeared in the comedy film, Next Day Air.
In late 2012, Cassidy remade South Korean singer Psy's international hit single "Gangnam Style, re-titling it "Condom Style". The remake reportedly earned Cassidy an endorsement deal with Trojan.In 2013, Cassidy released a biography titled Behind B.A.R.S: The Authorized Biography of Cassidy.In late 2014, Cassidy returned to battle rap by battling Los Angeles-based veteran Dizaster, on December 6, 2014, at Filmon.com's "Ether" event.


== Personal life ==


=== Murder case ===
On April 15, 2005, three men, including AR-Ab and Cassidy, armed with pistols and an AK-47 assault rifle, fired on three unarmed men during an argument that occurred in the West Oak Lane neighborhood in Northwest Philadelphia. Desmond Hawkins was killed by a shot in the back. Hawkins' two other friends were treated at hospitals for gunshot wounds and released.
On June 9, a warrant was issued for Cassidy's arrest on charges of murder, attempted murder, reckless endangerment, aggravated assault, conspiracy and weapons possession. Cassidy surrendered to Philadelphia police on the afternoon of June 17. At his arraignment on Saturday, June 18, he was denied bail, and sent to Philadelphia's Curran-Fromhold Correctional Facility, a high-security prison, where he would serve his time during the trial and after he was sentenced.Cassidy's murder case took a turn when the primary witness withdrew his confession. This resulted in the judge stating that Cassidy would stand trial for third-degree murder. On August 16, 2005, Municipal Judge Marsha Neifield ruled that prosecutors had sufficient evidence to charge Cassidy with third-degree murder, attempted murder and weapons offenses. This was later overturned to the original, first degree charge - negating the possibility of parole. On January 25, 2006, Cassidy was convicted of involuntary manslaughter, two counts of aggravated assault and possession of an instrument of crime for his involvement in the shooting. He was sentenced to 11 to 23 months in prison plus probation and was credited with the 7 months he had already served.Cassidy was released from Pennsylvania's Curran-Fromhold Correctional Facility on March 2, 2006, after serving eight months.Cassidy talks about his arrest and time in prison in the 2011 film Rhyme and Punishment, which documents various hip-hop artists who have done county jail or state/federal prison time.


=== Car wreck ===
Cassidy was seriously injured in a vehicle wreck on the night of October 5, 2006, when a commercial truck collided with his SUV, in which he was a passenger. He was taken to the Jersey City Medical Center, where he was diagnosed with a fractured skull and several broken bones on the left side of his face. He still has visible scars from the wreck.
"I was in a coma for about seven or eight days," he said. "And then they put me into a medicated coma, so that if I woke up I wouldn't be traumatized by what I went through. When I first woke up out of my coma, I had amnesia, so I couldn't really remember everything. I didn't have full amnesia; I could remember certain things. The only people I really knew were my mom, my son, people that's real close that you knew all your life. I knew their names but even certain experiences I couldn't remember at first. I couldn't remember none of my raps, even the songs I performed — 'Hotel,' 'I'm a Hustla,' none of that. The doctor told me that I suffered brain damage, but it was temporary, it wasn't permanent. So the same way it takes time for your body to heal, he said it's gonna take your brain time to heal."


== Discography ==

Split Personality (2004)
I'm a Hustla (2005)
B.A.R.S. The Barry Adrian Reese Story (2007)
C.A.S.H. (2010)
Da Science (2020)
Da Formula (2020)
Da Wiseman (2021)
Currently working on a new project with Eddy Cube (2021)


== Filmography ==
2007: American Gangster as uncredited
2009: Next Day Air as Cass
2011: Rhyme and Punishment as himself
2014: Kony Montana as a local boss


== References ==


== External links ==

Cassidy at Last.fmCurtis Brown (born April 18, 1960), better known by the stage name Grandmaster Caz or Casanova Fly, is an American rapper, songwriter, and DJ. He was a member of the hip hop group The Cold Crush Brothers from 1979 to the mid-1980s. He is best known as the (uncredited) main writer of Big Bank Hank's raps on the seminal 1979 hip hop single by The Sugarhill Gang, "Rapper's Delight".
He worked with Debra Harris as a celebrity tour guide for Hush Hip Hop Tours, a hip-hop cultural sightseeing tour company in New York City, and is a board member of The Kennedy Center's Hip-Hop Council, Hip-Hop Ambassador and board member for Windows of HipHop and CEO of GMC Entertainment Inc.


== Musical career ==
Caz first encountered rap in 1974 at a Kool Herc block party.  Shortly after, he teamed with DJ Disco Wiz under the name Casanova Fly to form one of the first DJ crews, Mighty Force.  Caz was also the first rapper to perform both DJ (record) and MC (vocal) duties.In the late 1970s, he joined The Cold Crush Brothers. Caz admits that he himself stole new equipment during the New York City blackout of 1977.In 2015, Caz was featured on the single "Downtown" by Macklemore and Ryan Lewis.


=== Sugarhill Gang controversy ===
Grandmaster Caz is generally acknowledged to have been the main writer of the lyrics of Big Bank Hank (real name Henry Lee Jackson) on the 1979 The Sugarhill Gang single "Rapper's Delight", which sold around 5 million copies and introduced hip hop music to the mainstream. Jackson had been Grandmaster Caz's manager, and was working at a pizza parlor when music executive Sylvia Robinson overheard him rapping Grandmaster Caz's lyrics, and asked him to be part of the group she was forming, The Sugarhill Gang. Jackson had never rapped before, and asked Caz for lyrics to use. This is most evident in his opening verse, when, instead of introducing himself as Big Bank Hank, he raps, "Check it out, I'm the C-A-S-A-, N-O-V-A, and the rest is F-L-Y". (Casanova Fly is Grandmaster Caz's alternate moniker.) Big Bank Hank's verse in the song about seducing Lois Lane away from Superman was also lifted from Caz.In 2000, Caz released the song "MC Delight", a parody of "Rapper's Delight" which told his side of the story. In the song, Caz states about giving away his lyrics, "I gave it to him thinking/ Check books, credit cards, more money/ Than a sucker could ever spend/ But he never gave a nigga a god damn dime/ And was supposed to be my friend".


== Other work ==
He currently hosts Hush Hip Hop Tours, the official sightseeing tour of Harlem and The Bronx.Caz was a prominent feature in Ice-T's 2012 documentary "Something from Nothing: The Art of Rap".
Caz was interviewed for the 2004 documentary Just to Get a Rep.
In 2008, he was one of the participants at the Cornell University Library conference on Hip Hop.In November 2021, Grandmaster Caz and female MC Sha-Rock started co-hosting the show That's The Joint on the Sirius XM channel Rock The Bells Radio, run by LL Cool J. The show runs Monday through Friday, 10 AM to 1 PM.
At present Grandmaster Caz is working with and for A&E, MTV, Paramount, De La Calle, and the History Channel.


== Awards and honors ==
In 1998, Caz was listed #11 out of Blaze Magazine's Top 50 MCs of all Time. He was also inducted into the Technics DJ Hall of Fame in 1999.In June 2008, Grandmaster Caz was inducted into the Bronx Walk of Fame. A street plaque bearing his name is now on permanent display on the Grand Concourse, the most famous thoroughfare in the Bronx.
On April 18, 2022, Grandmaster Caz's birthday, newly-appointed Bronx Borough President Vanessa Gibson proclaimed April 18 "Grandmaster Caz Day".


== Legacy ==
Artists who cite Grandmaster Caz as an influence include Will Smith, Rakim, Big Daddy Kane and Jay-Z.Grandmaster Caz was portrayed by Jaleel White in the Drunk History episode "American Music".
In episode 3 of part 2 of The Get Down, while listening to "Rapper's Delight" on the radio, The Get Down Brothers' member, Boo, tells his date that Grandmaster Caz is the real writer of the line and says that Caz is the "nicest MC around".


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===
The Grandest Of Them All (LP)  Tuff City  1992
You Need Stitches: The Tuff City Sessions 1982–1988 (LP)  Ol' Skool Flava  2004
Rare & Unreleased Old School Hip Hop '86–'87 (LP)  Ol' Skool Flava  2006
Mid Life Crisis (CD, Album)  Jazz Child Records  2008


=== Singles & EPs ===
Grandmaster Caz & Chris Stein – Wild Style Theme Rap 1 Chrysalis  1983
Grand Master Caz & Chris Stein – Wild Style Theme Rap No.1 (12", Promo) Toshiba EMI Ltd  1983
Yvette / Mister Bill (12")  Tuff City  1985
Count Basey (12")  Tuff City  1986
Get Down Grandmaster / I'm Caz (12")  Tuff City  1987
You Need Stitches (12")  Tuff City  1989
Star Search (12")  Tuff City  1992
Grandmaster Caz with Whipper Whip* – To All The Party People (12")  Tuff City  1994
45 King Old School Remixes Vol. 4 (12", EP)  Ol' Skool Flava  1996
Grandmaster Caz & Chris Stein – Wild Style Theme Rap 1 / Wild Style Subway Rap Beyongolia  1998
DJ Parker Lee Presents: Grandmaster Caz (12")  Jazz Child Records  1999
MC Delight (Casanova's Revenge) (12")  Jazz Child Records  2000
Grandmaster Caz & DJ Signify – Untitled (7")  Grandgood Records  2003
Grandmaster Caz & DJ Haitian Star – Move The Crowd / Scene Of The Rhyme (12", Ltd) 360° Records (2)  2005
Capitol 1212 and Grandmaster Caz – Encore, Sure you Want More 12" Kool Kat records 2008


=== Compilations ===
Wild Style Original Soundtrack 1982
Crotona Park Jams (CD, Comp, Mixed)  (Grandmaster Caz Self-released)  2008
RareHipHop.com & Grandmaster Caz – Underground Heat Vol 1


== References ==


== External links ==
Discography at Discogs
Grandmaster Caz at IMDb
DJ Grandmaster Caz Interview at NAMM Oral History Collection (2012)Luke Caswell, known mononymously as Cazwell, is an American rapper, record producer and songwriter. He has released the three studio albums Get into It in 2006, Watch My Mouth in 2009 and Hard 2 B Fresh in 2014, along with videos and singles.


== Career ==


=== 1999–05: Career beginnings ===
Starting in the late 1990s, under the name Caswell, he was part of the hip-hop duo Morplay, which also included female MC Crasta Yo. Morplay started in Boston and moved to New York in 1999. In 2003, Cazwell released his first single The Sex That I Need with Avenue D.


=== 2006–08: Get Into It ===
In 2006, Cazwell released his debut studio album Get into It featuring lead single "All Over Your Face" and the four follow-up singles "Do You Wanna Break Up", "I Buy My Socks On 14th Street" and "Watch My Mouth".
His debut single "All Over Your Face" was banned from Logo due to explicit lyrics and sexual imagery portrayed in the music video.Cazwell was featured as a guest rapper on Colton Ford's "That's Me" along with Stephen Reed and Peppermint's "Servin' it Up". During the summer of 2007, Cazwell was a part of the multi-artist True Colors Tour which traveled through 15 cities in North America. The tour, sponsored by Logo, was hosted by comedian Margaret Cho and headlined by Cyndi Lauper and included Deborah Harry, Rufus Wainwright, The Dresden Dolls, Rosie O'Donnell, Indigo Girls, Stephen Reed and other special guests. Profits from the tour helped to benefit LGBT organizations Human Rights Campaign, PFLAG and The Matthew Shepard Foundation.


=== 2009–12: Watch My Mouth ===
His second album, Watch My Mouth was released on September 1, 2009, containing all of his previous singles, except "Do You Wanna Break Up". The album was preceded by the single "I Seen Beyoncé" featuring Jonny Makeup, released back in September 2008. The video was directed by Francis Legge and Bec Stupak. In 2009, he released "Tonight", which sampled "Give Me Tonight" by Shannon. In 2010, he released the single, "Ice Cream Truck", which was featured in the film Spork as well has been included on a Watch My Mouth deluxe edition re-release. The video of the song was directed by Marco Ovando, premiered on YouTube on July 30, 2010 and received over 1 million views in its first week. The singles "Get Into It" featuring guest vocals by Amanda Lepore and "Get My Money Back" featuring Lost Daze followed in 2010 and 2011 respectively. Cazwell frequently hosts and DJs parties such as BoysRoom in New York City featuring guests such as Ladyfag, Amanda Lepore, Dj Adam, Raquel Reed and Stephen Reed. In 2012, Cazwell appeared on the variety show She's Living for This, hosted by the drag queen Sherry Vine. On the show, he performed his single "Get My Money Back". In 2012, he appeared on "Something For Everybody", a song by DAB & Get Far along with Jonathan Mendelsohn.


=== 2013–present: Hard 2 B Fresh ===
Cazwell collaborated with Peaches on the single "Unzip Me", released back on November 8, 2011. On June 19, 2012, "Rice and Beans" was released. The songs appear on Cazwell's third studio album Hard 2 B Fresh. In 2013, the single "Guess What?" was released, featuring the singer Luciana. "No Selfie Control" was released in the late of 2013. The single and music video for "Helen Keller" featuring Drag Race superstar Manila Luzon, Roxy (known for underground House classics "Get Huh" and "Accident") and Richie Beretta was also released. On August 22, Cazwell announced that his third studio album Hard 2 B Fresh would be released on September 30 and posted the track listing and the cover art on his official site. In summer of 2015, Cazwell released another single from Hard 2 B Fresh entitled "The Biscuit". Its video featured Middle-Eastern imagery including pyramids, camels, a snake charmer, tan-skinned models wearing keffiyehs, and original music from South African DJ Naaldekoker's track "Ek Smaak Jou".In 2015, Cazwell collaborated with fashion designer Geoffrey Mac on a range of form-fitting underwear, based on the colours used in the 'Ice Cream Truck' video.In 2017, he released Loose Wrists, his first single produced by his new music label, Snow Cone.


== Artistry ==
Cazwell is openly gay and his work focuses on gay and bisexual urban themes and content, and his music and videos are frequently played on Logo, a US cable channel geared towards the gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) community. His music comprises the genres hip hop, dance, electronica, house and homo hop.


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===
2006: Get into It
2009: Watch My Mouth
2014: Hard 2 B Fresh


=== Singles ===


=== Featured singles ===
2006: Colton Ford feat. Cazwell & Stephen Reed – "That's Me"
2006: Peppermint feat. Cazwell – "Servin' it Up"
2009: Amanda Lepore feat. Cazwell – "My Hair Looks Fierce"
2010: Amanda Lepore feat. Cazwell – "Marilyn"
2012: DAB & Get Far vs. Jonathan Mendelsohn & Cazwell – "Something For Everybody"


== Filmography ==


=== Television ===
2013: Watch What Happens: Live
2012: She's Living for This
2009: RuPaul's Drag Race


=== Music videos ===
2009: "Cotton Candy" (Cameo appearance in Amanda Lepore music video)
2009: "I Seen Beyoncé at Burger King"


== See also ==
LGBT culture in New York City
LGBT hip hop
List of LGBT people from New York City


== References ==


== External links ==
Official SiteJames Lloyd, better known by his stage name Lil' Cease, is an American rapper and former member of hip hop group Junior M.A.F.I.A.


== Early life, family and education ==
James Lloyd was born in New York City.


== Career ==
As part of Junior M.A.F.I.A., Cease's first album Conspiracy  was released in 1995. He gained mainstream attention with a memorable verse on "Player's Anthem", the album's highest charting single. Frequent name dropping from mentor The Notorious B.I.G. throughout Cease's career helped keep the young rapper in the spotlight.
Cease featured on Def Jam's soundtrack for the 1997 comedy film How to Be a Player alongside LeVert, Cam'ron and Mase. He is also known for being a featured artist on Lil' Kim's record Crush on You from her debut album Hard Core, which was a number 1 hit on the Hot Rap Songs chart.  Rapper Cam'ron revealed that he wrote the original rendition of the song Crush on You.After making guest appearances on other artists' albums, Cease released his debut and only studio album The Wonderful World of Cease A Leo in 1999. It peaked at #26 on the Billboard 200 and #3 on the Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums, and features Jay Z, Lil' Kim and Bristal. In 2005, Lil' Cease, Banger and MC Klepto reunited Junior M.A.F.I.A. and released the group's second album, Riot Musik. In January 2009, Lil' Cease released "Letter to B.I.G.", which sampled "Letter to B.I.G." by Jadakiss from the soundtrack to the feature film Notorious.


== In other media ==
Lil' Cease is portrayed in the feature film Notorious, the biopic of the Notorious B.I.G., by Marc John Jefferies.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===
The Wonderful World of Cease A Leo (1999)


=== Collaboration albums ===
Conspiracy with Junior M.A.F.I.A. (1995)
Riot Musik with Junior M.A.F.I.A. (2005)


=== Mixtapes ===
Junior M.A.F.I.A.: The Lost Files (2009)
Everything Is Hard Body Vol. 1 (2010)
Lil Cease & the Mafia Dons: Riding for the King with Mafia Dons (2014)


=== Guest appearances ===


== Filmography ==
Paper Soldiers (2002)
Chronicles of Junior M.A.F.I.A. (2004)
Reality Check: Junior Mafia vs Lil Kim (2006)
Dave Chappelle's Block Party (2006)
Life After Death: The Movie (2007)


== References ==


== External links ==
Lil' Cease on TwitterJohn Felix Anthony Cena  ( SEE-nə; born April 23, 1977) is an American professional wrestler, actor, and former rapper currently signed to WWE. With the most world championship reigns in WWE history, Cena is widely regarded as one of the greatest professional wrestlers of all time.Cena moved to California in 1998 to pursue a career as a bodybuilder and switched to professional wrestling in 1999, and made his debut for Ultimate Pro Wrestling (UPW). He signed with the World Wrestling Federation (WWF, now WWE) in 2001 and was assigned to its developmental territory Ohio Valley Wrestling (OVW), winning the OVW Heavyweight Championship and OVW Southern Tag Team Championship. After moving to SmackDown in 2002, Cena gained fame and success after adopting the character of a trash-talking rapper. After winning the WWE Championship in 2005, Cena transitioned into a clean-cut, heroic character which he described as a "goody-two shoes Superman". He led the company as its franchise player and public face for the next decade.A joint-record 16-time world champion, Cena is a record 13-time WWE Champion and three-time World Heavyweight Champion. He is also a five-time WWE United States Champion, a two-time WWE Tag Team Champion, a two-time World Tag Team Champion, a two-time Royal Rumble winner, and a one-time Money in the Bank winner. He has also headlined multiple major WWE pay-per-view events, including its flagship event, WrestleMania, five times. His professional wrestling career has been met with mixed critical and audience reception, with praise for his character work and promotional skills, but criticism for his perceived over-representation and on-screen dominance relative to other wrestlers.Cena first starred in The Marine (2006), and gained praise for his performances in Trainwreck (2015), Ferdinand (2017), Blockers, and Bumblebee (both 2018). He starred in F9 (2021) as Jakob Toretto, reprising his role in Fast X (2023), and portrayed Peacemaker in The Suicide Squad (2021) and the eponymous television series (2022–present). He released a studio album, You Can't See Me, in 2005. Outside his work in entertainment, Cena is known for his involvement in numerous charitable causes, namely with the Make-A-Wish Foundation, where he has granted the most wishes, at over 650.


== Early life ==
Cena was born in West Newbury, Massachusetts on April 23, 1977, to Carol (née Lupien) and John Joseph Cena. His mother is of English and French-Canadian descent, while his father, a former ring announcer for Chaotic Wrestling, has Italian ancestry. His maternal grandfather was baseball player Tony Lupien, while his maternal great-grandfather was businessman Ulysses J. Lupien. He is the second oldest of five brothers: Dan, Matt, Steve, and Sean. A fan of wrestling growing up, he would create championship belts out of cardboard for himself and his brothers. He is a cousin of computer scientist Natalie Enright Jerger and was raised Roman Catholic. Cena was teased and beaten up while in school, and asked for a weightlifting bench at the age of 12.Cena attended Central Catholic High School in Lawrence, Massachusetts, before transferring to Cushing Academy, a private prep boarding school in Ashburnham, Massachusetts. He then attended Springfield College in Springfield, Massachusetts, where he was an NCAA Division III All-American center and captain on their football team. He graduated from Springfield College in 1999 with a degree in exercise physiology and body movement, after which he pursued a bodybuilding career and worked as a limousine driver. Cena worked in the store area of Gold's Gym for $6 an hour.


== Professional wrestling career ==


=== Ultimate Pro Wrestling (1999–2001) ===
Cena idolized Hulk Hogan growing up, moving to California in 1998 to begin training for a professional wrestling career the following year at Ultimate Pro Wrestling's (UPW) Ultimate University, operated by Rick Bassman. He started wrestling in local flea markets, and once he was placed into an in-ring role, Cena began using a semi-robotic character known as The Prototype. Some of this period of his career was documented in the Discovery Channel program Inside Pro Wrestling School. He held the UPW Heavyweight Championship for 27 days in April 2000, and wrestled for the UPW until March 2001.


=== World Wrestling Federation / World Wrestling Entertainment / WWE ===


==== Ohio Valley Wrestling (2000–2002) ====
On October 10, 2000, while billed as The Prototype, Cena made his unofficial debut for then World Wrestling Federation (WWF) on a SmackDown! taping in a dark match against Mikey Richardson, which he lost. He received another tryout on January 9, 2001 at a SmackDown! taping in Oakland, California, defeating Aaron Aguilera before wrestling again in a dark match at a SmackDown! taping on March 13.In 2001, Cena signed a developmental contract with the WWF and was assigned to its developmental territory Ohio Valley Wrestling (OVW). During his time there, Cena wrestled under the ring name The Prototype and held the OVW Heavyweight Championship for three months and the OVW Southern Tag Team Championship (with Rico Constantino) for two months.Throughout the early months of 2002, Cena constantly found himself competing on house shows for the WWF, where he wrestled against the likes of Shelton Benjamin and Tommy Dreamer. After his main call up in June 2002, he continued to appear on OVW programming until September 25, when he lost to Kenny Brolin in a Loser Leaves OVW match. He would later appear in a one-off appearance for the developmental farm in November under the ring name Mr. P in a six-man tag team match, where he teamed with Hall of Famer Big Boss Man and Charlie Haas, in a winning effort against Lance Cade, Trevor Murdoch and Sean O'Haire.Cena's call-up to the main roster meant that he was part of OVW's now legendary Class of 2002, alongside Brock Lesnar, Randy Orton and Batista, a class which would eventually become known as the "OVW 4".


==== The Doctor of Thuganomics (2002–2005) ====
Cena made his WWE television debut on the June 27 episode of SmackDown! by answering an open challenge by Kurt Angle. After declaring he possessed "ruthless aggression", he lost by a pinning combination, but put on a good showing. After the match, he was congratulated by Billy Kidman, Faarooq, Rikishi, and The Undertaker, becoming a fan favorite. He began feuding with Chris Jericho, whom Cena defeated on July 21 at Vengeance.In October, Cena and Billy Kidman failed to win a tag team tournament to crown the first WWE Tag Team Champions of the SmackDown! brand in the first round. The next week on SmackDown!, Cena turned on and attacked Kidman, blaming him for their loss and turning heel for the first and only time in his WWE career. On the October 17 episode of SmackDown!, Cena defeated Kidman, but lost in a rematch the next week. At Rebellion on October 26, Cena and Dawn Marie lost to Kidman and Torrie Wilson in a mixed tag team match. Shortly after, on a Halloween-themed episode of SmackDown!, Cena dressed as Vanilla Ice, performing a freestyle rap. The following week on SmackDown!, Cena received a new character: a rapper who cut promos while rhyming. He used the nickname "The Doctor of Thuganomics" and expanded his gimmick to include rapping before his matches, wearing hats and sports jerseys as part of his ring gear. While on a bus journey with other WWE superstars, Cena was involved in a freestyle rap session with Rikishi and Rey Mysterio, impressing Stephanie McMahon, leading to the gimmick's adoption. As the character evolved, Cena began adopting a variant of the 1980s WWF logo—dropping the "F"—as his "signature symbol", along with the slogan "Word Life".  Moreover, he was joined by an enforcer, Bull Buchanan, who was rechristened to B-2 (also written B² and pronounced "B-Squared"). Buchanan was replaced with Red Dogg until he was sent to the Raw brand in February.Cena then sought the WWE Championship, held by Brock Lesnar. He entered a number one contender's tournament for the title, gaining upset wins over Eddie Guerrero, The Undertaker and Chris Benoit. At Backlash on April 27, Cena failed to win the title from Lesnar. On May 18 at Judgment Day, Cena and The F.B.I. (Chuck Palumbo and Johnny Stamboli) defeated Benoit, Rhyno and Spanky. At Vengeance on July 27, Cena lost to The Undertaker. After losing to Kurt Angle at No Mercy on October 19, Cena became a fan-favorite when he joined Angle as a member of his team on November 16 at Survivor Series.
Cena participated in the Royal Rumble match at Royal Rumble on January 25, 2004, but was eliminated by Big Show. At No Way Out on February 15, Cena faced Big Show and Kurt Angle in a triple threat match for a WWE Championship match at WrestleMania XX, which Cena lost by submission to Angle. At WrestleMania on March 14, Cena defeated Big Show to win the United States Championship, his first singles championship in WWE. He retained the title against Rene Dupree on May 16 at Judgment Day, and in a fatal four-way match involving Dupree, Rob Van Dam and Booker T at The Great American Bash on June 27, until he was stripped of the title on the July 8 episode of SmackDown! by Kurt Angle (the SmackDown! General Manager) after accidentally attacking him in his wheelchair. Cena won the title back by defeating Booker T in a best of five series that started on August 15 at SummerSlam and culminated on October 3 at No Mercy, only to drop it to the débuting Carlito Caribbean Cool the following week on SmackDown!. The duo began a feud which resulted in Cena allegedly being stabbed in the kidney while at a Boston-area nightclub by Carlito's bodyguard, Jesús; this worked "injury" was used to keep Cena out of action for a month while he was filming The Marine. After returning on November 14 at Survivor Series, Cena won the United States Championship back from Carlito on the November 18 episode of SmackDown!. He retained the title against Jesús at Armageddon on December 12 in a street fight.


==== WWE Champion (2005–2007) ====
On January 30, 2005, Cena took part in the Royal Rumble match, making it to the final two. He and Batista went over the top rope at the same time, at first ending the match but the match was restarted and won by Batista. At No Way Out on February 20, Cena defeated Kurt Angle to earn a spot in the SmackDown! brand's WrestleMania 21 main event match, beginning a feud with then WWE Champion John "Bradshaw" Layfield (JBL) and his Cabinet in the process. In the early stages of the feud, Cena lost the United States Championship to Cabinet member Orlando Jordan. At WrestleMania 21 on April 3, Cena defeated JBL to win the WWE Championship, his first world championship. Now with a spinner WWE Championship belt, JBL took the original title belt and claimed he was still the WWE Champion, until Cena defeated him in an "I Quit" match at Judgment Day on May 22 to retain the title.Cena was drafted to the Raw brand on the June 6 episode of Raw, becoming the first wrestler selected in the annual draft lottery. Cena immediately entered into a feud with Raw General Manager Eric Bischoff, after refusing to participate in the "war" against the Extreme Championship Wrestling (ECW) roster at the 2005 ECW One Night Stand. At Vengeance on June 26, Cena retained the title against Christian and Chris Jericho in a triple threat match. With Bischoff vowing to make Cena's stint on Raw difficult, he hand-picked Jericho to take Cena's championship from him. During their feud, even though Cena was portrayed as the "face" (hero) and Jericho as the "heel" (villain), a vocal section of the live crowds, nonetheless, were cheering Jericho and booing Cena during their matches, most notably on August 21 at SummerSlam, when Cena defeated Jericho to retain the title. Crowds booed Cena again during his next feud with Kurt Angle, who took over as Bischoff's hand-picked #1 contender after Cena defeated Jericho in a You're Fired match on the August 22 episode of Raw. Cena held on to the WWE Championship through his feud with Angle, losing to him by disqualification on September 18 at Unforgiven, pinning Shawn Michaels in a triple threat match involving Angle at Taboo Tuesday on November 1, and pinning Angle on November 27 at Survivor Series. The feud with Angle saw Cena add a secondary, submission based, finishing maneuver—the STFU (a stepover toehold sleeper, though named for a stepover toehold facelock)—when he was put into a triple threat submissions only match on the November 28 episode of Raw.
At New Year's Revolution on January 8, 2006, Cena retained the WWE Championship in the Elimination Chamber match after last eliminating Carlito, but immediately afterwards, Mr. McMahon announced Edge was cashing in his Money in the Bank contract—a "guaranteed title match against the WWE Champion at a time and place of the owner's choosing". Two quick spears allowed Edge to pin Cena and win the championship. Cena won the title back on January 29 at Royal Rumble. After that, Cena began feuding with Triple H. The crowd, which had mostly cheered Cena over the previous few months, started booing him again and cheering the villain Triple H. Cena beat Triple H at WrestleMania 22 on April 2 to retain the title. The negative reaction towards him intensified when he faced Rob Van Dam at ECW One Night Stand on June 11 which took place in front of a boisterous crowd of mostly original ECW fans at the Hammerstein Ballroom. Cena was met with raucous jeering and chants of "Fuck you, Cena", "You can't wrestle", and "Same old shit". When he began performing different moves as the match progressed, the fans started chanting "You still suck". Cena lost the WWE Championship to Van Dam after interference from Edge.
On the July 3 episode of Raw, Edge won the championship from Van Dam in a triple threat match that also involved Cena, re-igniting their feud. After Edge went about retaining the title by dubious means—getting himself disqualified (for which championships do not change hands)—and using brass knuckles on August 20 at SummerSlam he introduced his own version of Cena's "custom" title belt, this one with his logo placed on the spinner. Cena eventually regained the championship in a match and an arena of Edge's choice: a Tables, Ladders and Chairs match on September 17 at Unforgiven at the Air Canada Centre in Edge's hometown of Toronto, Ontario, Canada, after performing the FU on Edge through two tables off a ladder; the match had a stipulation that had Cena lost, he would have joined the SmackDown! brand. Cena returned with his version of the spinner title belt on the next night's Raw.On the heels of his feud with Edge, Cena was placed in an inter-brand angle to determine the "Champion of Champions"—or which was the most dominant champion in WWE's three brands. Cena, World Heavyweight Champion King Booker, and ECW World Champion Big Show were booked in a triple threat match at Cyber Sunday, with the viewers voting on which of the three championships would be placed on the line. At the same time, Cena was involved in a storyline with non-wrestler Kevin Federline, who appeared on Raw with Johnny Nitro and Melina. After getting into a worked physical altercation with Federline on Raw, he appeared on November 5 at Cyber Sunday to hit Cena with the World Heavyweight Championship during the match, helping Booker retain his title. On the January 1 episode of Raw, Cena was pinned by Federline with an assist from Umaga. At New Year's Revolution on January 7, 2007, Cena defeated Umaga to end his undefeated streak and retain the WWE Championship. At Royal Rumble on January 28, Cena retained the title against Umaga in a Last Man Standing match.One night after the Royal Rumble, an impromptu team of Cena and Shawn Michaels defeated Rated-RKO (Edge and Randy Orton) for the World Tag Team Championship, making Cena a double champion. At WrestleMania 23 on April 1, Cena retained the WWE Championship against Michaels. The next night on Raw, Michaels turned on Cena, costing them the tag titles in the second of two 10-team battle royals, by throwing Cena over the top rope and eliminating the team. The Hardys (Matt and Jeff) won the match and the titles. Cena retained the WWE Championship against Michaels, Orton, and Edge in a fatal four-way match on April 29 at Backlash. The Great Khali then declared his intentions to challenge for Cena's championship, attacking and "laying out" all three of the top contenders before assaulting Cena and stealing the title belt. On May 20 at Judgment Day, Cena became the first person to defeat Khali by submission and then by pinfall on June 3 at One Night Stand in a Falls Count Anywhere match. Cena retained the WWE Championship in a five-pack challenge on June 24 at Vengeance: Night of Champions, and against Bobby Lashley on July 22 at The Great American Bash. Later that summer, Randy Orton was named the #1 contender for Cena's championship. Leading up to SummerSlam on August 26, Orton delivered a number of sneak-attacks, performing three RKOs to Cena, who in the actual match at SummerSlam, retained the championship. A rematch took place at Unforgiven on September 16, which Orton won by disqualification after Cena ignored the referee's instructions and continued to beat on him in the corner.During a match with Mr. Kennedy on the October 1 episode of Raw, Cena suffered a legitimate torn pectoral muscle while executing a hip toss. Though finishing the match and taking part in the scripted attack by Orton after the match, surgery the following day found that his pectoralis major muscle was torn completely from the bone. At the time, it was estimated this would require six months to a year of rehabilitation. As a result, Cena was stripped of the title by Mr. McMahon on the next night's episode of ECW, ending the longest WWE Championship reign in over 19 years. Cena's surgery was performed by orthopedic surgeon James Andrews at St. Vincent's Hospital in Birmingham, Alabama. Two weeks later in a video update on WWE.com, Dr. Andrews and Cena's physical trainer both said that he was several weeks ahead of where he was expected to be in his rehabilitation at that time.


==== World Heavyweight Champion (2008–2010) ====

On January 27, 2008, at Royal Rumble, Cena made a surprise return as the final participant of the eponymous match, winning it and the traditional WrestleMania XXIV title shot, last eliminating Triple H. Instead of waiting until WrestleMania, the shot was cashed in against WWE Champion Randy Orton at No Way Out on February 17, winning by disqualification, therefore not being awarded the title. The following night on Raw, Cena was placed back into WrestleMania's WWE Championship match on March 30, defeating Orton in a non-title match with Triple H as special guest referee, making it a triple threat match, during which he was pinned by Orton. On April 27 at Backlash, Cena failed to regain the title in a fatal four-way elimination match, in which he was eliminated by Orton. During the match, Cena eliminated JBL, renewing their feud from 2005. Cena defeated JBL on May 18 at Judgment Day and at One Night Stand on June 1 in a First Blood match. Cena failed to regain the WWE Championship from Triple H on June 29 at Night of Champions. JBL defeated Cena in a New York City Parking Lot Brawl at The Great American Bash on July 20 to end their feud.On the August 4 episode of Raw, Cena won his second World Tag Team Championship with Batista, defeating Cody Rhodes and Ted DiBiase but failed to retain the championship the following week against the former champions. At SummerSlam on August 17, Batista defeated Cena. Cena was named one of four contenders for CM Punk's World Heavyweight Championship in the Championship Scramble match at Unforgiven on September 7, but was replaced by Rey Mysterio after suffering a herniated disc in his neck in his SummerSlam match, which required surgery. Cena underwent successful surgery to repair the injury.Cena made his in-ring return at Survivor Series on November 23, defeating Chris Jericho for his first World Heavyweight Championship. He retained the title against Jericho at Armageddon on December 14. After defeating JBL at the Royal Rumble on January 25, 2009, Cena lost the championship at No Way Out on February 15 to Edge, who attacked Kofi Kingston and took his place in the Elimination Chamber match. Cena received his rematch for the title at WrestleMania 25 on April 5 in a triple threat match involving Big Show and won. He lost the championship back to Edge in a Last Man Standing match at Backlash on April 26 after interference from Big Show, who chokeslammed Cena through a spotlight. Cena defeated Big Show at Judgment Day on May 17 and Extreme Rules on June 7 in a submission match by applying the STF. During Cena's feud with Big Show, The Miz challenged him to a match on the April 27 episode of Raw, but as Cena was out due to injury, Miz claimed an unofficial win via forfeit and continued to do this over the following weeks, until Cena defeated him at The Bash on June 28.
At Night of Champions on July 26, Cena challenged for the WWE Championship in a triple threat match against Triple H and defending champion Randy Orton (a rematch from WrestleMania XXIV), but was pinned by Orton after interference from Cody Rhodes and Ted DiBiase. The next night on Raw, Cena won a beat the clock challenge to earn another shot at the WWE Championship at SummerSlam on August 23, where Orton used underhanded tactics to retain. At Breaking Point on September 13, Cena defeated Orton in an "I Quit" match to win his fourth WWE Championship. He lost the title back to Orton in a Hell in a Cell match on October 4 at Hell in a Cell, but regained it at Bragging Rights on October 25 in a sixty minute Anything Goes Iron Man match. Cena retained the title against both Triple H and Shawn Michaels in a triple threat match at Survivor Series on November 22 but lost it to Sheamus on December 13 at TLC: Tables, Ladders & Chairs in a tables match. The next night on Raw, Cena competed in a tournament to crown the 2009 Superstar of the Year, defeating CM Punk in the first round and Orton in the finals later that night to win the honor. He would get his rematch for the title against Sheamus on the December 28 episode of Raw, where he won by disqualification, but did not win the championship.At Royal Rumble on January 31, 2010, Cena competed in the titular match, making it to the final two where he was eliminated by the returning Edge. Cena regained the title at Elimination Chamber on February 21 in the eponymous match, but his reign was cut short after Mr. McMahon made him defend the title immediately against Batista, who emerged victorious. Cena defeated Batista at WrestleMania XXVI on March 28 for the title, and successfully defended it in a rematch at Extreme Rules on April 25 in a Last Man Standing match. Cena defeated Batista for a third time in an "I Quit" match at Over the Limit on May 23, ending their feud.


==== Feuds with The Nexus, The Rock, and CM Punk (2010–2013) ====

On the June 7 episode of Raw, during a match against CM Punk, Cena was attacked by all eight former contestants of the first season of NXT, with Wade Barrett as their leader. This group later referred to itself as The Nexus. The stable's interferences made him lose the WWE Championship at Fatal 4-Way on June 20 to Sheamus and a steel cage match against Sheamus on July 18 at Money in the Bank. In response to The Nexus, Cena formed an alliance with Edge, Chris Jericho, John Morrison, R-Truth, The Great Khali and Bret Hart, defeating The Nexus at SummerSlam on August 15 with help from the returning Daniel Bryan, a former member of Nexus, who replaced Khali.Cena faced Barrett at Hell in a Cell on October 3 with the stipulations that if he were to lose, he would join The Nexus, and if he were to win, The Nexus would disband. After Barrett defeated Cena, he reluctantly joined The Nexus. Cena and fellow Nexus member David Otunga defeated Cody Rhodes and Drew McIntyre to win the WWE Tag Team Championship on October 24 at Bragging Rights. Later that night, he was forced to help Barrett defeat Orton in a WWE Championship match, giving Barrett the disqualification win, but not the title. The following night on Raw, Cena and Otunga lost the titles to fellow Nexus members Heath Slater and Justin Gabriel, when Barrett ordered Otunga to lay down and lose the titles. At Survivor Series on November 21, Cena officiated a match for the WWE Championship between Barrett and Orton. Per stipulation, if Barrett didn't win the championship, Cena would be "fired" from the WWE; Orton defeated Barrett to retain the title, and Cena was fired (kayfabe).The following night on Raw, Cena gave a farewell speech before costing Barrett the WWE Championship by interfering in his rematch with Orton. A week later, Cena invaded Raw, first as a spectator, but then attacked members of Nexus, explaining he would still take down Nexus one by one despite not being employed. On the December 13 episode of Raw, Cena was rehired by Barrett in exchange that he would face him on December 19 at TLC: Tables, Ladders & Chairs in a chairs match, which Cena won.
On the January 17, 2011 episode of Raw, Cena returned and faced Punk in a match which ended in a no contest after Cena was attacked by the debuting Mason Ryan, who later joined The Nexus. Cena competed in the Royal Rumble match on January 30, which saw Cena eliminate most of the Nexus members, ending his feud with the stable. He made it to the final five before being eliminated by WWE Champion The Miz, who was not part of the match. Cena won the titular match at Elimination Chamber on February 20 to face Miz at WrestleMania XXVII for the WWE Championship.
On the February 21 episode of Raw, Cena replied in rap form to comments made by The Rock the previous week, as he returned as the announced guest host of WrestleMania. That night, Cena was placed into a WWE Tag Team Championship match, teaming with The Miz to defeat Justin Gabriel and Heath Slater to become the new WWE Tag Team Champions. However, their rematch clause was immediately invoked, and Gabriel and Slater won the titles back after The Miz attacked Cena, making their reign the shortest in the title's history. After weeks of insults, Cena and The Rock finally met on the March 28 episode of Raw, where, after a verbal confrontation, and a brief attack by The Miz and Alex Riley, Cena attacked The Rock with the Attitude Adjustment. At WrestleMania on April 3, Cena and Miz fought to a double countout, but The Rock restarted the match and performed a Rock Bottom on Cena, allowing The Miz to retain the title. The next night on Raw, Cena, in response to The Rock "screwing" him out of the title, agreed to face him in the main event of WrestleMania XXVIII, the first WrestleMania match to be set up one year in advance. At Extreme Rules on May 1, Cena defeated The Miz and John Morrison in a triple threat steel cage match to become WWE Champion. Cena then successfully defended the title against The Miz on May 22 at Over the Limit in an "I Quit" match, and R-Truth on June 19 at Capitol Punishment.Cena began a feud with CM Punk, who was leaving the company due to his contract expiring after Money in the Bank. Punk defeated Cena to win the WWE Championship on July 17 at Money in the Bank and left the company with the title. Dave Meltzer of the Wrestling Observer Newsletter awarded the match five stars, Cena's first and only five star match. On the July 25 episode of Raw, after Rey Mysterio won the WWE Championship in a tournament, Cena challenged and defeated Mysterio later that night to become WWE Champion for a record-breaking 11th time, only to be interrupted by Punk, who also claimed to be champion. Punk again defeated Cena at SummerSlam on August 14 in a championship unification match, after special guest referee Triple H missed Cena's foot on the rope. After Alberto Del Rio became WWE Champion by cashing in his Money in the Bank briefcase to defeat Punk, Cena became the #1 contender and beat Del Rio at Night of Champions on September 18 for his tenth WWE Championship. He lost it back to Del Rio at Hell in a Cell on October 2 in a triple threat Hell in a Cell match also involving Punk. Cena lost his rematch to Del Rio at Vengeance on October 23 in a Last Man Standing match due to interference by The Miz and R-Truth. After weeks of Miz and Truth attacking Cena and employees, Cena was allowed to choose his partner to challenge Miz and Truth at Survivor Series on November 20; Cena chose The Rock as his partner, and they defeated Miz and Truth, though The Rock gave Cena a Rock Bottom in the ending.
Cena then began a feud with Kane, who cited his disgust for Cena's "Rise Above Hate" slogan and claimed that Cena would need to embrace the hate to defeat The Rock at WrestleMania. Cena fought Kane to a double countout at Royal Rumble on January 29, 2012, and then defeated him in an Ambulance match on February 19 at Elimination Chamber. At WrestleMania XXVIII on April 1, Cena faced The Rock in the main event; the match ended when Cena attempted the People's Elbow on The Rock, and he countered with a Rock Bottom for the pinfall.
The following night on Raw, Cena accepted his loss and invited The Rock to the ring so that he could congratulate him. However, his call was answered instead by the returning Brock Lesnar, who attacked Cena with an F-5. This led to Cena feuding with Raw and SmackDown General Manager John Laurinaitis, who revealed that he signed Lesnar to bring "legitimacy" to the WWE and for Lesnar to become its "new face". At Extreme Rules on April 29, Cena defeated Lesnar in an Extreme Rules match. He lost to Laurinaitis at Over the Limit on May 20 after interference from Big Show, but at No Way Out on June 17, Laurinaitis was fired after Cena defeated Big Show in a steel cage match with both their jobs on the line. The following night on Raw, Laurinatis was given one final opportunity to challenge Cena. However that night Cena defeated Laurinaitis and David Otunga in a handicap match to end his feud with Laurinaitis.Cena won the WWE Championship Money in the Bank ladder match on July 15 at Money in the Bank, earning a contract for a shot at the WWE Championship anytime within a year. On July 23, on Raw 1000, Cena cashed in his contract on CM Punk, and won by disqualification after Big Show interfered, becoming the first person to cash in a Money in the Bank contract and not win a title. Cena's feud with Punk continued into SummerSlam on August 19, where Punk retained the title against Cena and Big Show in a triple threat match, and at Night of Champions on September 16, where they fought to a draw. After being sidelined with a legitimate arm injury, Cena returned at Survivor Series on November 18, but was pinned by Punk in a triple threat match also involving Ryback. Cena then feuded with Dolph Ziggler over an alleged relationship with AJ Lee and at TLC: Tables, Ladders & Chairs on December 16, he lost to Ziggler in a ladder match for Ziggler's World Heavyweight Championship Money in the Bank contract, after AJ turned on Cena. The following night on Raw, Cena teamed with Vickie Guerrero to face Ziggler and AJ in a mixed tag team match which ended in a disqualification after Cena was attacked by the debuting Big E Langston. Cena defeated Ziggler on the January 7 episode of Raw, and again in a steel cage match the following week, despite interference from AJ and Langston in both matches, ending the feud.On January 27, 2013, Cena won his second Royal Rumble match, announcing that he would pursue the WWE Championship at WrestleMania 29. Cena, along with Ryback and Sheamus, began feuding with The Shield, culminating in a six-man tag team match on February 17 at Elimination Chamber, which The Shield won. On the February 25 episode of Raw, Cena defeated CM Punk to reaffirm his status as the #1 contender for the Rock's WWE Championship. At WrestleMania on April 7, Cena defeated Rock in their rematch to win his eleventh WWE Championship. Cena then began a rivalry with Ryback, during which he suffered a legitimate achilles tendon injury. Cena retained his championship against Ryback in a Last Man Standing match at Extreme Rules on May 19; the match ended in a no contest after both men were down for a 10 count. Cena then defeated Ryback in a Three Stages of Hell match on June 16 at Payback. He defeated Mark Henry via submission on July 14 at Money in the Bank. At SummerSlam on August 18, Cena lost the WWE Championship to Daniel Bryan, with Triple H as the special guest referee ending his reign at 133 days. The following night on Raw, Cena announced he would undergo surgery for a triceps tear and would be out for four to six months.


==== World championship pursuits and reigns (2013–2015) ====
Cena returned at Hell in a Cell on October 27, defeating Alberto Del Rio to win his third World Heavyweight Championship. He retained the title against Damien Sandow on the October 28 episode of Raw, and Alberto Del Rio in a rematch on November 24 at Survivor Series. Cena next challenged then-WWE Champion Randy Orton to unify their respective championships, with The Authority agreeing and arranging for a Tables, Ladders and Chairs title unification match at TLC: Tables, Ladders & Chairs on December 15, which Cena lost. A rematch occurred at the Royal Rumble for the now unified WWE World Heavyweight Championship on January 26, where Cena lost after being distracted by The Wyatt Family. At Elimination Chamber on February 23, their interference caused Cena's elimination in the Elimination Chamber match.

After Elimination Chamber, Bray Wyatt accepted Cena's challenge for a WrestleMania XXX match. Wyatt wanted to prove that Cena's heroic act was a facade characteristic of "this era of lies" and to turn Cena into a "monster". At WrestleMania on April 6, Cena defeated Wyatt despite interference from Luke Harper and Erick Rowan. The feud continued after WrestleMania based on the story that Wyatt was capturing Cena's fanbase, exemplified by Wyatt leading a children's choir to the ring on the April 28 episode of Raw, where they later donned sheep masks. At Extreme Rules on May 4, Wyatt defeated Cena in a steel cage match after repeated interference from the rest of the Wyatt Family members and a demonic child. At Payback on June 1, Cena defeated Wyatt in a well received Last Man Standing match to end their feud; Cena buried Wyatt under multiple equipment cases to win the match.On the June 16 episode of Raw, Cena defeated Kane in a stretcher match to qualify for the ladder match for the vacant WWE World Heavyweight Championship at Money in the Bank on June 29, where he won his 15th world championship. He retained the title at Battleground on July 20 in a fatal four-way match against Roman Reigns, Randy Orton and Kane. At SummerSlam on August 17, Cena lost the championship to Brock Lesnar in a squash match, during which Lesnar hit Cena with sixteen suplexes and two F-5s, ending his reign at 49 days. Cena invoked his title rematch clause against Lesnar for Night of Champions on September 21, nearly winning before Seth Rollins attacked him to cause a disqualification. Despite this, he became the first wrestler to defeat Lesnar in two WWE pay-per-view events. Cena then began feuding with Dean Ambrose for the right to face Rollins at Hell in a Cell on October 26, but Ambrose won the right by defeating Cena in a No Holds Barred Contract on a Pole match. Cena faced Randy Orton instead in a Hell in a Cell match to determine the #1 contender for the WWE World Heavyweight Championship, which Cena won.
On the October 27 episode of Raw, Cena rejected The Authority's offer to join forces, resulting in a 5-on-5 Survivor Series elimination tag match between Team Cena and Team Authority at Survivor Series. His team consisted of Dolph Ziggler, Big Show, Erick Rowan and Ryback. At Survivor Series on November 23, Big Show turned on Cena, causing his elimination, but Ziggler eventually won the match for Team Cena with the interfering Sting's help. Per the match stipulation, The Authority were stripped from power and only Cena could bring them back. At TLC: Tables, Ladders & Chairs on December 14, Cena defeated Rollins in a tables match to retain his WWE World Heavyweight Championship #1 contender status. It was then announced that Cena would face Lesnar for the title at the Royal Rumble. On the December 29 episode of Raw, Rollins and Big Show held guest host Edge hostage, forcing Cena to reinstate The Authority. On the January 5 episode of Raw, The Authority added Rollins to the title match at Royal Rumble involving Cena and Lesnar. Ziggler, Ryback and Rowan were "fired" for joining Team Cena at Survivor Series. On the January 19 episode of Raw, Cena won a handicap match against Rollins, Big Show and Kane to retain his title shot at the Royal Rumble and win back the jobs of Ziggler, Ryback and Rowan. At the Royal Rumble on January 25, Cena was unsuccessful in capturing the title.


==== United States Champion (2015–2016) ====
Cena then began feuding with United States Champion Rusev, and at Fastlane on February 22, Cena failed to win the title from Rusev after passing out from his submission, the Accolade. Rusev had hit Cena with a low blow following a distraction by his manager Lana. Cena challenged Rusev to a rematch, which was declined, and Stephanie McMahon decreed that Cena would not compete at WrestleMania 31 unless Rusev agreed to a rematch. On the March 9 episode of Raw, Cena attacked Rusev, refusing to release the STF submission hold, causing Lana to grant Cena the match. Cena defeated Rusev at WrestleMania on March 29 to win his fourth United States Championship, marking Rusev's first pinfall loss in the main roster.Cena would issue an open challenge each week on the program with his United States Championship on the line, successfully defending the title against the likes of Dean Ambrose, Stardust, Bad News Barrett, Kane, Sami Zayn, Neville, Zack Ryder and Cesaro. Cena retained his title against Rusev in a Russian Chain match on April 26 at Extreme Rules and an "I Quit" match on May 17 at Payback, ending their feud. The following night on Raw, Cena was attacked by then-NXT Champion Kevin Owens, setting up a Champion vs. Champion match at Elimination Chamber on May 31, which Owens won. Cena defeated Owens in a rematch at Money in the Bank on June 14. At The Beast in the East on July 4, Cena and Dolph Ziggler defeated Kane and King Barrett. Cena defeated Owens again at Battleground on July 19 to retain the United States Championship and end their feud. Cena then resumed his feud with then WWE World Heavyweight Champion Seth Rollins, with Rollins refusing Cena's challenges for the title. On the July 27 episode of Raw, The Authority forced Cena to defend the title against Rollins, which he did successfully despite suffering a legitimate broken nose during the match. Cena then faced Rollins in a "Winner Takes All" match at SummerSlam on August 23, for both the WWE World Heavyweight Championship and the United States Championship, which Cena lost after guest host Jon Stewart, appearing to side with Cena, instead attacked him with a steel chair, ending Cena's reign at 147 days.Cena defeated Rollins to win the title for the fifth time on September 20 at Night of Champions, a record in the WWE ownership era of the title. Cena retained his title against Rollins in a steel cage match on October 3 at WWE Live from Madison Square Garden, while also restarting his open challenges. At Hell in a Cell on October 25, Cena lost the title to the returning Alberto Del Rio in an open challenge. After a hiatus, Cena returned on the December 28 episode of Raw, defeating Del Rio by disqualification in a rematch for the title. On January 7, he underwent surgery on a shoulder injury, which would keep him out of action for an undisclosed length of time.


==== Feud with AJ Styles (2016–2017) ====
Cena returned at WrestleMania 32 on April 3, 2016, helping The Rock fend off The Wyatt Family. Cena then made his full return on the Memorial Day edition of Raw on May 30, four months earlier than had been expected for his type of injury. He was confronted by AJ Styles, only to be betrayed by Styles, who joined his former Club teammates Luke Gallows and Karl Anderson in attacking Cena. On June 19 at Money in the Bank, Styles defeated Cena with interference from Gallows and Anderson. On the July 4 episode of Raw, Cena was again attacked by The Club, but was saved by Enzo Amore and Big Cass, setting up a six-man tag team match on July 24 at Battleground, which Cena, Amore, and Cass won after Cena pinned Styles. On the July 19 episode of SmackDown at the 2016 WWE draft, Cena was drafted to the SmackDown brand, while also defeating Club member Luke Gallows in a singles contest. Cena continued his feud with Styles, and at SummerSlam on August 21, Cena lost their rematch. With Styles later winning the renamed WWE World Championship, Cena challenged him and Dean Ambrose in a triple threat match for the title on October 9 at No Mercy. He lost the match after being pinned by Styles, which came after Ambrose and Cena simultaneously made Styles submit, therefore restarting the match. Cena took a sabbatical from WWE to film American Grit season 2.On January 29, 2017, Cena defeated Styles at the Royal Rumble to win the WWE Championship and tie Ric Flair for the most recognized world title reigns at 16. However, Cena would lose the championship two weeks later in an Elimination Chamber match at Elimination Chamber on February 12 to Bray Wyatt. Two nights later on SmackDown, Cena lost a triple threat match against Wyatt for the championship in a match also featuring Styles. Cena then began a feud with The Miz, with Miz accusing Cena of being a hypocrite because of his movie commitments, while Cena accused Miz of stealing other wrestlers' moves and personalities. Miz's wife Maryse then slapped Cena before Cena and his girlfriend Nikki Bella sent Miz and Maryse retreating. SmackDown General Manager Daniel Bryan then set up a mixed tag team match for WrestleMania 33 on April 2, which Cena and Bella won. Cena proposed marriage to Bella after the match and she accepted.


==== Free agent (2017–2019) ====
In July 2017, WWE dubbed Cena a "free agent" during the Superstar Shake-up, meaning he could work for both the Raw and SmackDown brands. Cena defeated Rusev in a flag match at Battleground on July 23, Baron Corbin at SummerSlam on August 20, and lost to Roman Reigns on September 24 at No Mercy. Cena returned to SmackDown the next month after Commissioner Shane McMahon named him the final member of Team SmackDown for the men's 5-on-5 elimination match against Team Raw at Survivor Series; at the event on November 19, Cena was eliminated by Kurt Angle and Team SmackDown was defeated.Cena failed to win the Royal Rumble on January 28, 2018 and the Elimination Chamber match to determine the #1 contender for the Universal Championship on February 25 at Elimination Chamber, as well as a six-pack challenge on March 11 at Fastlane for the WWE Championship. On April 8 at WrestleMania 34, Cena was quickly defeated by The Undertaker. After defeating Triple H on April 27 at the Greatest Royal Rumble, he thanked the crowd for sticking by him during a tough period, referencing his loss to Undertaker and his recent breakup with Nikki Bella. Cena competed in a tag team match with Bobby Lashley against Elias and Kevin Owens at Super Show-Down on October 6 in Melbourne, Australia, which he and Lashley won.  He was also scheduled for a match at Crown Jewel in Saudi Arabia on November 2, but Cena refused to work the event following the murder of Saudi journalist Jamal Khashoggi. On November 29, it was announced Cena had been awarded the Muhammad Ali Legacy Award Winner by Sports Illustrated.Cena returned to WWE television on the January 1, 2019 episode of SmackDown, where he and Becky Lynch defeated Andrade Cien Almas and Zelina Vega in a mixed tag team match. On the January 14 episode of Raw, Cena lost to Finn Bálor, Drew McIntyre, and Corbin in a fatal four-way match to determine the #1 contender for the Universal Championship at Royal Rumble. Cena was scheduled to compete in the Royal Rumble on January 27, but was taken out due to an in-storyline ankle injury supposedly suffered during the match.


==== Part time appearances (2019–present) ====
He appeared at WrestleMania 35 on April 7 in his "Doctor of Thuganomics" persona and interrupted Elias' concert, performing his finisher on Elias (calling it by its original name of the F-U) after insulting him. On the July 22 episode of Raw titled Raw Reunion, he engaged in a rap battle with The Usos.Cena returned to WWE again on the February 28, 2020 episode of SmackDown, seemingly announcing his retirement before he was confronted by "The Fiend" Bray Wyatt, who challenged him to a match at WrestleMania 36—a sequel to their WrestleMania XXX match in 2014—which Cena accepted. On the second night of the event on April 5, rather than a traditional wrestling match, the two squared off in a surreal cinematic-style match called a Firefly Fun House match, taking the competitors on a trip through history as moments from Cena's and Wyatt's history were played out, including Cena's debut against Kurt Angle, a moment featuring his Doctor of Thuganomics character, and the pair's match at WrestleMania XXX. Wyatt ultimately defeated Cena, and following his victory Cena's motionless body vanished from the middle of the ring.Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, Cena was unable to appear at WrestleMania 37, marking the first time he missed a WrestleMania in nearly 20 years, as he had wrestled or at least appeared at the event every year since his first appearance at WrestleMania XIX in 2003. At the time, Cena was in Canada filming the HBO Max series Peacemaker, and the pandemic made it logistically impossible for him to travel to Tampa, Florida for WrestleMania 37, as upon his return to Canada, he would have had to quarantine for two weeks, which would have shut down production on the series. Cena did, however, appear in a WWE advertisement to help announce the location of WrestleMania 38. He finally made his return to WWE programming at Money in the Bank on July 18, 2021, confronting Roman Reigns after the latter retained his Universal Championship against Edge in the main event. Following this, WWE announced the Summer of Cena tour, confirming Cena had signed a 25-appearance deal. After initially being scheduled to face Finn Bálor for the title, Cena ultimately highjacked a contract signing on the July 30 episode of SmackDown so he would challenge Reigns at SummerSlam. At the event on August 21, Reigns defeated Cena after a back-and-forth contest.On the June 6, 2022 episode of Raw, it was announced that Cena would return on the June 27 episode of Raw, which marked the 20th anniversary of his main roster in-ring debut. On that episode of Raw, Cena returned and cut a promo recalling all his memories and thanking the fans for their support. He also made appearances backstage with The Street Profits, Ezekiel, Theory, Seth "Freakin" Rollins, and Omos. On the December 30 episode of SmackDown, Cena wrestled for the first time in over a year, where he and Kevin Owens defeated The Bloodline's Roman Reigns and Sami Zayn. On the day of "Raw is XXX", Cena was announced as the cover star for the WWE 2K23 video game, the second time for him being a cover star of a WWE 2K game after WWE 2K15. In February and March 2023, Austin Theory would call out Cena multiple times and challenge him to a match at WrestleMania 39 for Theory's United States Championship. Cena would eventually accept, but lost the match between the pair.
On July 1, Cena made a surprise appearance at Money in the Bank, where he was confronted by Grayson Waller after Cena stated that WrestleMania should come to the United Kingdom. Waller would then attack Cena, before Cena would go on to deliver the Attitude Adjustment on Waller. On August 18, Cena appeared on SmackDown, congratulating Edge on his 25th anniversary with WWE. On August 21, it was confirmed that Cena's next appearance would be on the September 1 episode of SmackDown, as well as at the Superstar Spectacle event in India the following week on September 8, with Cena himself stating that the latter would be his first time wrestling in India. It was then revealed that after Superstar Spectacle, Cena was booked for the following seven episodes of SmackDown, as well as serving as the host of the Payback pay-per-view on September 2. Cena was also the special guest referee in the LA Knight vs. The Miz match at Payback, where Knight emerged victorious with Cena showing respect to Knight. At the Superstar Spectacle event, Cena and Seth "Freakin" Rollins teamed up to defeat Imperium (Giovanni Vinci and Ludwig Kaiser). Following several weeks of feuding with The Bloodline (Jimmy Uso & Solo Sikoa) on the September 22 edition of ‘SmackDown’ it was announced Cena would face the duo at Fastlane in a handicap match. The following week, it was revealed that LA Knight would join Cena in the match, turning it into a tag team match at the PLE. At Fastlane, Cena & Knight defeated Uso and Sikoa. This was Cena’s first pay-per-view victory since 2018.


== Professional wrestling style and persona ==


=== In-ring style ===
Cena's original gimmick portrayed a white rapper who wore jerseys, backwards hats, a chain with a padlock around his neck, and was known as the "Doctor of Thuganomics". First as "The Prototype", and later under his real name, Cena sometimes used underhanded tactics to score victories, such as using his chain as a weapon behind the referee's back. Cena often rapped before his matches, insulting his opponents, events that happened in the media and even the crowd. Cena also regularly performed "rap battles", where he and his opponent took turns rapping on each other. In 2006, shortly after his debut film, The Marine, his wrestling character shifted from that of a rapper to a young military upstart, wearing dog tags and cargo shorts to the ring and also performing a salute to the crowd. Cena said in a 2011 interview with WWE.com that "every night when I do that salute, it's also a sign of respect to the men and women that don the uniform of the Armed Forces."During WWE's change from TV-14 to TV-PG in mid-2008, the name of Cena's finishing move, the FU, was changed to the Attitude Adjustment and his finishing submission move, the STFU, was renamed the STF to fit with the WWE's new policies. During his career, he has been known for ending his matches with a sequence of moves, dubbed the "Five Moves of Doom". The moves typically go in the following order: flying shoulder block, sit-out hip toss, protobomb, Five Knuckle Shuffle, and Attitude Adjustment.Cena has portrayed a heroic character throughout his WWE career, except for a villainous run in 2002–2003. His signature ring gear includes jean shorts, sneakers, wristbands, and armbands. He also wears a variety of T-shirts and baseball caps, which commonly include one of his catchphrases: "Never Give Up", "You Can't See Me", "Hustle, Loyalty, Respect", and "Respect. Earn it". He has a history of returning from both real and scripted injuries much sooner than expected. ESPN reporter David Shoemaker said in April 2016, "Never underestimate Cena's recuperative abilities. He's somewhere on the recovery scale between German platelet-rich plasma therapy and Deadpool." Fellow wrestler Big Show said he felt most stable being lifted by Cena, despite Cena being over 200 lbs lighter and almost a foot shorter—a testament to Cena's functional strength.


=== Fashion ===
During his WWE career, Cena's has used his attire in an attempt to reflect the most current fashions and styling within the hip hop culture that his character represents. Cena started out wearing "throwback jerseys" and Reebok pumps until WWE produced specific Cena merchandise which he began wearing. While Cena was a member of the SmackDown brand, one of his WWE-produced T-shirts bore the suggestive spoonerism "Ruck Fules". Whenever it appeared on television, the image was censored, not by the network, but by WWE to sell more shirts under the premise that it was "too hot for TV". He also wore a chain with a large padlock, occasionally using it as a weapon, until WrestleMania 21, when it was replaced with a chromed and diamond studded "Chain Gang" spinner medallion matching his spinner title belt.
Around the time The Marine was released, Cena began wearing more military related attire, including camouflage shorts, dog tags, a Marine soldier cap, and a WWE produced shirt with the legend "Chain Gang Assault Battalion". Shortly after WrestleMania 23, when promotion for The Marine ended, the military attire diminished and was replaced with apparel bearing his new slogan "American Made Muscle" along with denim shorts, not seen since he was a member of the SmackDown roster. He then wore shirts that promoted Cenation and his trademark line "You Can't See Me".


=== Legacy ===
Cena has been called the greatest professional wrestler of all time by his peers Kurt Angle, John "Bradshaw" Layfield, and veteran industry personality Paul Heyman. When discussing Cena's legacy on his podcast, Jim Cornette (who was head booker of OVW while Cena was there) stated "I think [Cena is] the last big star in wrestling", praising his work ethic, athletic ability and microphone skills.WWE chairman Vince McMahon said he regarded John Cena as the WWE's Babe Ruth. Bleacher Report named Cena one of the 10 greatest WWE wrestlers of all time. In 2012, WrestleMania XXVIII, headlined by the John Cena vs. The Rock main event, became the highest drawing event in WWE history with 1,217,000 buys. The event held the record for the highest grossing live event in WWE history as of 2012; grossing $8.9 million.


== Acting career ==


=== Film ===
WWE Studios, a division of WWE which produces and finances motion pictures, produced Cena's first movie—The Marine, which was distributed theatrically by 20th Century Fox America beginning on October 13, 2006. In its first week, the film made approximately US$7 million at the United States box office. After ten weeks in theaters, the film grossed $18.7 million. Once the film was released on DVD, it fared better, making $30 million in rentals in the first twelve weeks.
His second film, also produced by WWE Studios, was 12 Rounds. Filming began on February 25, 2008, in New Orleans; the film was released on March 27, 2009.
Cena co-starred in his third film produced by WWE Studios, titled Legendary, which was played in selected theaters beginning on September 10, 2010 for a limited time. It was then released on DVD on September 28, 2010. That same year, Cena starred in the children's film Fred: The Movie, a film based on Lucas Cruikshank's YouTube videos of the same name, where he plays Fred's imaginary father. The movie was first aired on Nickelodeon in September 2010.In 2015, Cena made appearances in the comedy films Trainwreck, Sisters and a cameo in Daddy's Home. In 2017, Cena starred in the war drama The Wall and lent his voice for the animated films Surf's Up 2: WaveMania and Ferdinand. He also appeared in Daddy's Home 2, reprising his role in a larger capacity than the 2015 film. In 2018, Cena starred in the comedy Blockers, and had a leading role in the Transformers spin-off prequel, Bumblebee. In 2019, he starred in Playing with Fire, playing the role of smokejumper superintendent Jake Carson. In 2020, he voiced Yoshi, a polar bear, in the adventure comedy film Dolittle.In 2019, Cena was cast in Justin Lin's F9, playing Jakob Toretto, the brother of Vin Diesel's character Dominic Toretto. During the film's promotional tour in 2021, Cena referred to Taiwan as "a country". He subsequently posted an apology on social media as China considers Taiwan a part of China. Comedian and political commentator Bill Maher criticized Cena for his apology to China.Cena also was cast as Christopher Smith / Peacemaker in James Gunn's The Suicide Squad, a role originally intended for Dave Bautista. In 2023, he reprised his role as Jakob Toretto in Fast X, which premiered in theaters on May 19, 2023. He was also the voice of Rocksteady in Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles: Mutant Mayhem, which was released on August 2, 2023.


=== Guest appearances ===
Before his WWE debut, Cena made an appearance on the webcast Go Sick as Bruebaker, an angry, cursing wrestler in 2001.During his WWE career, Cena has appeared on ABC's Jimmy Kimmel Live! three times. He has also appeared on morning radio shows including the CBS and XM versions of Opie and Anthony as part of their "walkover" on October 10, 2006. Other appearances have included NBC's Late Night with Conan O'Brien, Fuse's Celebrity Playlist, Fox Sports Net's The Best Damn Sports Show Period, FOX's MADtv, G4's Training Camp (with Shelton Benjamin), and two appearances on MTV's Punk'd (August 2006 and May 2007), as the victim of a practical joke. He also served as a co-presenter, with Hulk Hogan, at the 2005 Teen Choice Awards, as a guest judge during the third week of the 2006 season of Nashville Star, and appeared at the 2007 Nickelodeon UK Kids Choice Awards.
In January 2007, Cena, Batista, and Ashley Massaro appeared representing WWE on an episode of Extreme Makeover: Home Edition, giving the children of the family whose house was being renovated WWE merchandise and eight tickets to WrestleMania 23. Two months later, he and Bobby Lashley appeared on the NBC game show Deal or No Deal as "moral support" to longtime WWE fan and front row staple, Rick "Sign Guy" Achberger. Edge and Randy Orton also appeared, but as antagonists. On April 9, 2008, Cena, along with fellow wrestlers Triple H and Chris Jericho, appeared on the Idol Gives Back fund-raising special. In March 2009, Cena made an appearance on Saturday Night Live during the show's cold opening sequence. On March 7, 2009, he was a guest on NPR's quiz show Wait Wait... Don't Tell Me! in a Not My Job sequence titled "Sure, pro wrestling is a good gig, but when you win, do they throw teddy bears into the ring?".


=== Television ===
In 2001, between his training in Ultimate Pro Wrestling and Ohio Valley Wrestling, Cena was involved in the UPN produced reality show Manhunt, in which he portrayed Big Tim Kingman, leader of the group of bounty hunters who chased down the contestants who acted as fugitives. The show, however, was mired in controversy when it was alleged that the portions of the show were rigged to eliminate certain players, scenes were re-shot or staged to enhance drama and contestants read from scripts.Cena was featured on the ABC reality series Fast Cars and Superstars: The Gillette Young Guns Celebrity Race, which aired in June 2007, making it to the final round before being eliminated on June 24, placing third in the competition overall.In 2007, Cena was interviewed for the CNN Special Investigations Unit documentary Death Grip: Inside Pro Wrestling, which focused on steroid and drug use in professional wrestling. When asked if he had taken steroids he was heard to reply, "I can't tell you that I haven't, but you will never prove that I have". The day after the documentary aired, WWE accused CNN of taking Cena's comments out of context to present a biased point of view, backing up their claim by posting an unedited video of Cena answering the same question – filmed by WWE cameras from another angle – in which he is heard beginning the same statement with "absolutely not". A text interview on the website with Cena later had him saying the news outlet should apologize for misrepresenting him, which CNN refused, saying they felt the true answer to the question began with the phrase "my answer to that question". However, they did edit the documentary on subsequent airings to include the "absolutely not".Cena hosted the Australian Nickelodeon Kids Choice Awards with Natalie Bassingthwaighte on October 11, 2008 in Melbourne. Cena guest starred as Ewan O'Hara, brother of Juliet O'Hara, in an episode of the fourth season of the comedy drama Psych. He also guest starred as himself in the seventh episode of Disney Channel's Hannah Montana Forever.
On August 17, 2015, Cena guest co-hosted Today on NBC. Cena appeared on Late Night with Seth Meyers on August 21, 2015. Cena co-hosted Today again on March 28–30 and May 9, 10, 13 and 30, 2016.
Cena hosted two seasons of American Grit on Fox, a reality television series with 10 episodes. 16 men and women were split into four teams, where challenges were given. A US$1 million prize was given to the winning team. American Grit premiered on Fox on April 14, 2016, and the finale of season 1 aired on June 9. Cena hosted the ESPN ESPY Awards on July 13, 2016, in Los Angeles. On December 10, 2016, Cena was the guest host of Saturday Night Live (SNL) on NBC.On January 24, 2017, Nickelodeon announced that Cena would host the 2017 Nickelodeon Kids' Choice Awards ceremony on March 11. On January 11, 2018, it was announced that he would be hosting the awards ceremony again on March 24, 2018, becoming the third host behind Whitney Houston and Rosie O'Donnell to host the ceremony back to back years. Two days later, the game show Keep It Spotless premiered with him as an executive producer. In addition, he was cast on Rise of the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles as the voice of the villain Baron Draxum. The series premiered in July 2018. On February 14, 2019, it was announced that Cena would host a revival of Are You Smarter than a 5th Grader on the network, which premiered June 10, 2019.In 2021, Cena co-hosted the TV game show Wipeout.


== Music career ==
In addition to his wrestling career, Cena is a rapper. He performed his fifth WWE theme song, "Basic Thuganomics", and it was featured on the WWE soundtrack album WWE Originals. He also recorded a song, "Untouchables", for the company's next soundtrack album WWE ThemeAddict: The Music, Vol. 6. He collaborated on a remix for the song "H-U-S-T-L-E" along with Murs, E-40, and Chingo Bling.Cena's debut album, You Can't See Me, was recorded with his cousin Tha Trademarc. It features, among other songs, his entrance theme, "The Time is Now", and the single "Bad, Bad Man", for which a music video was made that parodied 1980s culture, including the television show The A-Team. A video was also made for the second single, "Right Now", that premiered on the August 8, 2005 episode of WWE Monday Night Raw. Cena and Tha Trademarc were later featured on a track by The Perceptionists called "Champion Scratch". Cena appeared on T-Boz's album, Still Cool.In October 2014, Cena was featured on two songs with rapper Wiz Khalifa for his two singles "All Day" and "Breaks" for the soundtrack to the WWE 2K15 video game.In 2022, John Cena performed a piano rendition of Mötley Crüe's "Home Sweet Home" for the Peacemaker soundtrack.


=== Discography ===
Studio albums

You Can't See Me (2005)Soundtrack albums

Peacemaker (2022)


== Other ventures ==


=== Endorsements ===
Before his professional wrestling career, Cena appeared in an advertisement for Gold's Gym. As a wrestler, he has endorsed the energy drink YJ Stinger, appearing in commercials beginning in October 2003, and Subway, for whom he filmed advertisements with their spokesperson Jared Fogle in November 2006 that began airing the following January. For a time in 2007, he also endorsed two "signature collections" of energy drinks and energy bars sold by American Body Builders. In 2008, Cena filmed a commercial as part of Gillette's "Young Guns" NASCAR campaign.In 2009, Cena expanded his relationship with Gillette by introducing a new online campaign called "Be A Superstar" featuring himself alongside fellow WWE wrestlers Chris Jericho and Cody Rhodes. The campaign features motivational videos. After Dwayne "The Rock" Johnson called Cena "Fruity Pebbles" during their feud (in reference to Cena's colorful merchandise) Cena appeared on the box of Fruity Pebbles cereal in 2013.He was the pace car driver for the 58th annual Daytona 500. On October 13, 2016, Cena made his debut as the voice of Ernie the Elephant in a new commercial campaign launched by Wonderful Pistachios. He was named to Adweek's "Creative 100" and received praise for his performance. In 2020, Cena and Honda announced a partnership, with Cena becoming the new voice of Honda.


=== Philanthropy ===
Cena has granted over 650 wishes for children with life-threatening illnesses through the Make-A-Wish Foundation—the most in Make-A-Wish history, with his first wish dating back to 2002. The Guinness Book of World Records confirmed that not only had Cena granted this many wishes by mid-2022, but that second place was fewer than 200. In 2009, Cena received the Chris Greicius Celebrity Award.From late 2011 until WrestleMania XXVIII, Cena wore a black "Rise Above Hate" T-shirt promoting WWE's "Be a Star" anti-bullying campaign. In September and October 2012, Cena wore pink and black with the phrase "Rise Above Cancer" in partnership with Susan G. Komen for the Cure as part of Breast Cancer Awareness Month.In November 2016, Cena appeared in a public service announcement, "We Are America", sponsored by the Ad Council as part of its "Love Has No Labels" campaign.Cena made a $1 million donation to Black Lives Matter in June 2020 as part of the #MatchAMillion initiative made popular by K-pop band BTS.


== In popular culture ==

His catchphrase "You Can't See Me" originates from his early days of wrestling in the WWE where he was dared by his little brother to do the yayo dance on TV, which consists of moving your head while looking into the palm of your hand. Cena accepted the dare, but waved his hand in front of his face instead to make it look more visible to his brother. Over time, this evolved into his signature catchphrase "You Can't See Me". In mid-2015, Cena was the subject of the Internet meme "Unexpected John Cena", also known as simply "Unexpected Cena" or "IT'S JOHN CENA". He has also been the subject of many memes due to his catchphrase, "You can't see me" such as being invisible in photos.On May 10, 2021, Cena posted a video on his Weibo account, in which he sat in a car and ate ice cream while promoting the upcoming film Fast & Furious 9. In the video, Cena speaks Mandarin and sings into the ice cream cone as if it were a microphone. The video was viewed by millions of users and inspired the creation of new memes like "Bing Chilling".On May 24, 2021, a video of Cena apologizing to China was published on Twitter. While promoting Fast & Furious 9 in an interview, Cena stated Taiwan would be the first country to be able to view the film. This resulted in a backlash from Chinese social media users, prompting Cena to apologize in Mandarin in the video for the slip of the tongue. His apology received mixed reactions in China, and was the subject of further internet memes in the west.


== Personal life ==
Cena resides in Land o' Lakes, Florida.He has said numerous times that he does not want to have children because he does not want to be an absentee parent while he is focused on his career.While promoting his 2009 film 12 Rounds, Cena announced his engagement to Elizabeth Huberdeau. They were married on July 11, 2009. On May 1, 2012, Cena filed for divorce, which was finalized on July 18. Later that year, he began dating fellow wrestler Nikki Bella. They became engaged when Cena proposed to her at WrestleMania 33 on April 2, 2017, but ended their relationship in April 2018; they had been scheduled to marry on May 5.On October 12, 2020, Cena married girlfriend Shay Shariatzadeh, whom he had been dating since early 2019, in a private ceremony in Tampa, Florida. The two met during the production of Cena's 2019 film Playing with Fire, which was filmed in Vancouver, where Shariatzadeh works.Cena started learning Mandarin Chinese in 2016 to help the WWE expand its reach, and he spoke in Mandarin at a press conference in China. He also revealed in April 2018 that he learned to play the piano.In December 2017, the Ford Motor Company filed a lawsuit against Cena for selling his 2017 Ford GT, therefore violating his purchase agreement. According to Ford, he signed a contract to keep the car for at least two years but breached the agreement by selling it to make a net profit shortly after receiving it. On June 19, 2018, the two sides reached an undisclosed settlement, with Cena apologizing to Ford and Ford promising to donate the settlement to charity.In July 2018, Cena briefly moved to China, where he settled in Yinchuan. He went on to create a YouTube show on WWE's channel, highlighting his trips to local stores and markets. He explained that he would be living there for five months while working on a film, Hidden Strike, with Jackie Chan. The shoot concluded in November 2018.


== Awards and nominations ==


== Video games ==


== Championships and accomplishments ==


=== Professional wrestling ===
The Baltimore Sun
Best Feud of the Decade (2010) vs. Edge
Match of the Year (2007) vs. Shawn Michaels on April 23 at Raw
Wrestler of the Year (2007, 2010)
Feud of the Year (2010) vs. The Nexus
Ohio Valley Wrestling
OVW Heavyweight Championship (1 time)
OVW Southern Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Rico Constantino
Pro Wrestling Illustrated
Feud of the Year (2006) vs. Edge
Feud of the Year (2011) vs. CM Punk
Match of the Year (2007) vs. Shawn Michaels on Raw
Match of the Year (2011) vs. CM Punk at Money in the Bank
Match of the Year (2013) vs. Daniel Bryan at SummerSlam
Match of the Year (2014) vs. Bray Wyatt in a Last Man Standing match at Payback
Match of the Year (2016) vs. AJ Styles at SummerSlam
Most Improved Wrestler of the Year (2003)
Most Popular Wrestler of the Decade (2000–2009)
Most Popular Wrestler of the Year (2004, 2005, 2007, 2012)
Wrestler of the Year (2006, 2007)
Ranked No. 1 of the top 500 singles wrestlers in the PWI 500 in 2006, 2007 and 2013
Rolling Stone
Best Promos (2015) tied with Kevin Owens
Best Storyline (2015) vs. Kevin Owens
WWE Match of the Year (2015) vs. Kevin Owens at Money in the Bank
Sports Illustrated
Muhammad Ali Legacy Award (2018)
Ranked No. 4 of the top 10 wrestlers in 2017
Ultimate Pro Wrestling
UPW Heavyweight Championship (1 time)
World Wrestling Entertainment / WWE
WWE Championship (13 times)
World Heavyweight Championship (3 times)
WWE United States Championship (5 times)
WWE Tag Team Championship (2 times) – with The Miz (1) and David Otunga (1)
World Tag Team Championship (2 times) – with Batista (1) and Shawn Michaels (1)
Money in the Bank (2012 – WWE Championship contract)
Royal Rumble (2008, 2013)
WWE Championship No. 1 Contender's Tournament (2003, 2005)
Brisbane Cup (2009)
Slammy Award (10 times)Game Changer of the Year (2011) – with The Rock
Hero in All of Us (2015)
Holy $#!+ Move of the Year (2010) – Sending Batista through the stage with an Attitude Adjustment
Insult of the Year (2012) – To Dolph Ziggler and Vickie Guerrero: "You're the exact opposite. One enjoys eating a lot of nuts and the other is still trying to find his"
Kiss of the Year (2012) – with AJ Lee
Match of the Year (2013, 2014) – vs. The Rock for the WWE Championship at WrestleMania 29, Team Cena vs. Team Authority at Survivor Series
Superstar of the Year (2009, 2010, 2012)
Wrestling Observer Newsletter
Best Box Office Draw (2007)
Best Gimmick (2003)
Best on Interviews (2007)
Feud of the Year (2011) vs. CM Punk
Match of the Year (2011) vs. CM Punk at Money in the Bank on July 17
Most Charismatic (2006–2010)
Most Charismatic of the Decade (2000–2009)
Wrestler of the Year (2007, 2010)
Worst Feud of the Year (2012) vs. Kane
Worst Worked Match of the Year (2012) vs. John Laurinaitis at Over the Limit
Worst Worked Match of the Year (2014) vs. Bray Wyatt at Extreme Rules
Wrestling Observer Newsletter Hall of Fame (Class of 2012)


=== Other awards and honors ===
NCAA Division III All-American
Springfield College Athletic Hall of Fame inductee (Class of 2015)
Make-A-Wish Foundation Chris Greicius Celebrity Award
Make-A-Wish Foundation Special Recognition Award (for being the first to grant 300 wishes)
2014 Sports Social TV Entertainer of the Year
2014 Rumble Royalty Hall of Game Award
2014 Susan G. Komen Race for the Cure Grand Marshal
2016 USO Legacy of Achievement Award


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==

John Cena on WWE.com 
John Cena at IMDb 
John Cena on Twitter 
John Cena's profile at Cagematch.net , Wrestlingdata.com , Internet Wrestling DatabaseJulio Francisco Ramos (born July 24, 1981), better known as Ceschi Ramos, or simply as Ceschi ( CHESS-kee), is an American hip hop musician based in New Haven, Connecticut. He is a co-founder of Fake Four Inc. He won the Connecticut Music Awards for Best Hip Hop in 2014.


== Life and career ==
Ceschi released his first solo album, Fake Flowers, in 2004. They Hate Francisco False followed in 2006.In 2008, Ceschi and his brother David Ramos founded the record label Fake Four Inc.In 2010, Ceschi was arrested and pleaded guilty to a 100-pound marijuana shipment that he accepted at the home of his grandfather in New Haven.
Ceschi released The One Man Band Broke Up, a collaborative album with German producer DJ Scientist, in July 2010. It was described by Tiny Mix Tapes as "music for the saddest party in recorded human history."In 2014, Ceschi won the Connecticut Music Awards for Best Hip Hop. He released Broken Bone Ballads, a collaborative album with Canadian producer Factor Chandelier, in April 2015.  In 2019, Jahan Nostra and Ceschi won Best Music Video at the Hip Hop Film Festival for their video “El Chapo.”


== Discography ==
Studio albums

Fake Flowers (Beyond Space, 2004)
They Hate Francisco False (Net31, 2006)
The One Man Band Broke Up (Fake Four Inc., 2010) (with DJ Scientist)
Broken Bone Ballads (Fake Four Inc., 2015) (with Factor Chandelier)
Sad, Fat Luck (Fake Four Inc., 2019) (with Factor Chandelier)
Sans Soleil (Fake Four Inc., 2019)
This Guitar Was Stolen Along With Years Of Our Lives (Fake Four Inc., 2021)
Bring Us the Head of Francisco False (Fake Four Inc., TBA) (with Factor Chandelier)B-side / demo albums

Fake Flowers R.I.P. 1 (2005)
Fake Flowers R.I.P. 2 (2005)
Fake Flowers R.I.P. 3 (2005)
Forgotten Forever (Cooler Than Cucumbers, 2014)
Elm St. Sessions (Fake Four Inc., 2018)Toca (Ceschi with Danny Levin, David Ramos, Max Heath, Tommy V & Xololanxinxo)

Dancing with Skeletons (2003)
Toca (Two Tone Elephants, 2007)Dead by Wednesday (Ceschi with David Ramos, Opus, et al.)

Democracy Is Dead (Stillborn, 2005)
The Killing Project (Eclipse, 2008)
The Last Parade (Eclipse, 2011)Other collaborations

Anonymous Inc. (Anonymous Inc., 2001) (with David Ramos, as Anonymous Inc.)
A.O.K. (Anonymous Inc., 2003) (with David Ramos, Jay Scafariello & Robert Koizura, as The Most)
Knuck Feast (Grimm Image, 2007) (with David Ramos, iCON the Mic King & Jay Scafariello, as Knuck Feast)
Ceschi / Pat the Bunny (DIY Bandits, 2016) (with Pat the Bunny)
This Is Crime Wave (Bottles to the Ground, 2023) (with Fat Mike & Sam King, as Codefendants)Singles

"Count on It" b/w "Bad Jokes" (2008)
"Same Old Love Song" (2009)Guest appearances

Noah23 – "Pure Vibes" from Mitochondrial Blues (2004)
Noah23 – "Scream" from Jupiter Sajitarius (2004)
Noah23 – "Chicken Soup" from Cameo Therapy (2007)
Noah23 – "Faded" from Rock Paper Scissors (2008)
Awol One & Factor – "Back Then" from Owl Hours (2009)
Factor – "The Fall of Captain EO" from Lawson Graham (2010)
Common Grackle – "The Great Depression" from The Great Depression (2010)
Cars & Trains – "Some Lonesome Street Corner" (2010)
Awol One & Factor – "Never Gonna Take Us Out" from The Landmark (2011)
Noah23 – "Sea of the Infinite Wave" from Fry Cook on Venus (2011)
K-the-I??? – "No Closer to Autumn" from Synesthesia (2011)
Sole – "Coke Rap" from Nuclear Winter Vol. 2: Death Panel (2011)
Sole and the Skyrider Band – "We Will Not Be Moved" & "Vaya Con el Diablo" from Hello Cruel World (2011)
Bleubird – "Time 4 Real" from Cannonball!!! (2012)
Kristoff Krane – "Mouth of the Beast" from Fanfaronade (2012)
Dark Time Sunshine – "Hosanna in the Highest" from Anx (2012)
Myka 9 & Factor – "Bask in These Rays" from Sovereign Soul (2012)
Sadistik – "A Long Winter" from Flowers for My Father (2013)
Sole – "Civil War" from No Wising Up No Settling Down (2013)
Gregory Pepper & Madadam – "Cautionary Tales" from Big Huge Truck (2013)
Factor – "Raise the Dead" from Woke Up Alone (2013)
Loden – "Ceschi Is Seeing Straight" from The Star-Eyed Condition (2013)
Time – "Nona" from Newstalgia (2013)
Josh Martinez – "My Jacket" from Blotto (2013)
Sleep – "Substances" from Oregon Failure (2014)
Mike Mictlan – "Sell Out" from Hella Frreal (2014)
Sole & DJ Pain 1 – "Snitch Nation" from Pattern of Life (2014)
Jared Paul – "No Quits Till" from Get My Ghost (2015)
Factor Chandelier – "Noise Band" from Factoria (2016)
Sole & DJ Pain 1 – "Exodus" from Nihilismo (2016)
Jahan Nostra – "El Chapo” from ESP (2016)
Kay the Aquanaut – "Must Say" from 7 Vessels (2017)
Modré Hory – "10:00" from Luxus Clan (2017)
Factor Chandelier – "The Gospel" from Wisdom Teeth (2018)
Moodie Black – "Lips" from Lucas Acid (2018)


== Music references ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Ceschi discography at DiscogsCarlos Mandes, also known as DJ Charlie Chase, is a Puerto Rican DJ who played a key role in establishing Latinos as a contributing force in The Bronx's early hip hop culture. Hitting the hip hop scene in 1975, Chase was a founding member of The Cold Crush Brothers along with Dj Tony Tone and members Grandmaster Caz, JDL, EZ AD and Almighty Kay Gee. Chase and Tone were also responsible in forming the first ever MC convention in hip hop history in 1980.


== Early life ==
Chase was born in Manhattan on January 16, 1959 to Puerto Rican-born parents. Chase's family moved often and lived in many different New York City neighborhoods which were primarily Puerto Rican or Black. Chase began playing music as a bassist in bands at the age of 14 representing a variety of musical styles. Chase produced his first album at the age of 16.


== Career ==
In the 1980s, Chase DJ'd for WBLS alongside the legendary Funkmaster Flex. Chase received criticism from the Hispanic community for playing hip-hop music because at the time it was believed to be a genre reserved for Blacks. However, Chase's talent outweighed racial differences. He fused hip-hop with salsa, among other music genres, in order to create a sound that was uniquely his. In the early 1980s, Chase was the DJ for the legendary New York hip-hop Pioneer group The Cold Crush Brothers. Chase proved himself as an accomplished member of the hip-hop scene by being in The Cold Crush Brothers, the first rap group to be signed by CBS Records, and also the first to go on tour in Japan. In 1981, Chase got his first movie role. He played himself in the film Wild Style, the first hip-hop movie ever made. In the film, he had a small speaking part and he performed with his rap group. The popular cult movie granted him widespread exposure and allowed him to tour all over the world. Chase was inducted into the Technics DMC DJ Hall of Fame in 2003. Other DJs to receive this honour are the late Jam Master Jay, DJ Jazzy Jeff, and Grandmaster Flash.


== Influence ==
Despite the role Puerto Ricans played in the genre's creation in the South Bronx, Chase was one of the only Latino stars in hip-hop's early years. He remembers not feeling welcome because most early participants felt that it was “a Black thing and something that’s from their roots…being Hispanic, you’re not accepted in rap.”   Whether by his hair or sneaking the beat from “Tú Coqueta” into the middle of his set, Chase always openly boasted his ethnicity. “That was my way of opening the doors for everybody else to do what they’re doing now,” he said. “And being that I was there at the very beginning, that was the I way I had to do it, that was my contribution.”  When artists like Mean Machine popularized hugely influential Spanish-Language hip-hop, Chase originally didn't support it. Eventually, he realized that they were all on the same mission and threw his support behind what he deemed “cool and new.”  Chase was a pioneer and paved the way for future underground acts like Mellow Man Ace and Latin Empire and more mainstream acts like Fat Joe or Big Pun.


== Footnotes ==


=== Sources ===
Flores, Juan, "Puerto Rocks," in That's the Joint! The Hip-Hop Studies Reader, page 71, eds. Murray Foreman and Mark Anthony Neal (New York: Rutledge, 2004)
Latin RapLionel Du Fon Pickens (December 4, 1983 – May 17, 2015), better known by his stage name Chinx (formerly Chinx Drugz), was an American rapper. He was a member of The Rockaway Riot Squad alongside fellow slain rapper Stack Bundles. Chinx later joined French Montana's Coke Boys Records, gaining recognition for his appearances on the Coke Boys mixtapes and the Cocaine Riot mixtape series. He was killed in a drive-by shooting in Jamaica, Queens on May 17, 2015. Two men have since been arrested in the case.


== Early life ==


=== 1983–1999: Beginnings ===
Chinx was born and raised in Far Rockaway, Queens on December 4, 1983, living in both Redfern Houses and Edgemere Houses, now known as Ocean Bay Apartments. He spent time in North Amityville in his teenage years where he briefly attended high school. When speaking of how he started rapping, Chinx said, "I started rapping at the table in junior high school for fun with the homies, and then by 9th grade is when I started taking music seriously. At that point is when I started investing my street money into my studio time and trying to find my sound."He said he got the name "Chinx Drugz" since he "used to smoke a lot of weed back in the day, and this older chick used to call me chinky and it stuck; the Drugz, well, that’s self explanatory — I been slangin’ on these corners."


== Career ==


=== 2000–2010: Riot Squad and Hurry Up & Die series ===
Chinx first started rapping with his close friend Stack Bundles while he was in high school, whom he would later form the group Riot Squad with, along with local rappers Bynoe and Cau2Gs. The group started to gain a buzz throughout New York but that ended abruptly in early 2005 when Chinx was sentenced to nearly 5 years in prison. He served his time at Arthur Kill Correctional Facility. 
During this time, Bundles formed a friendship with rapper Max B, and together they joined Jim Jones' group Byrd Gang.While Chinx was incarcerated, on June 11, 2007,  fellow rapper and friend Stack Bundles was shot and killed. In late 2008, Chinx was released from prison and through his affiliation with the now deceased Bundles, he met Max B. The following year, Max B introduced Chinx to fellow New York rapper French Montana, who was still relatively unknown at the time. Together, Chinx and Montana formed the hip hop group, Coke Boys. On April 13, 2009, Drugz released his first solo mixtape, Hurry Up & Die Vol. 1: Get Ya Casket On.He followed that with Hurry Up & Die Vol. 2: From The Cage To The Stage on January 7, 2010. Drugz then released the third mixtape in that series, Hurry Up & Die Vol. 3 on April 13, 2010.


=== 2011–2012: Coke Boys and Cocaine Riot 1 & 2 ===
On March 15, 2011, Drugz released his fourth official mixtape Flight 2011, which was entirely produced by New York producer Harry Fraud.The mixtape featured a sole guest appearance from Coke Boys-cohort French Montana. On April 19, 2011, he released his fifth solo mixtape Cocaine Riot, featuring guest appearances from the various members of Coke Boys.On August 20, 2011, Coke Boys released their first official collaboration mixtape Coke Boys 2. The mixtape was primarily produced by Harry Fraud, with additional production from Lex Luger. Coke Boys 2 featured members Drugz, Montana, Cheeze, Flip, and Charlie Rock. Following the Coke Boys 2 release, on September 24, 2011, Drugz and French Montana released a collaboration mixtape named, Coke Boys Run NY.On April 13, 2012, Coke Boys released their second collaboration mixtape, Coke Boys 3, which significantly featured Montana and Drugz throughout, along with Flip, gianni maggiacomo, and Charlie Rock. Additional guest appearances came from Akon, Mac Miller, Rick Ross, Wale, and Red Cafe among others. The mixtape was met with positive reviews from music critics, with the production the focal point of the praise. XXL credited Montana and Drugz as being the stars of the mixtape.On July 3, 2012, Drugz released his sixth solo mixtape, Cocaine Riot 2, to positive critical reception with AllHipHop calling it a "classic". Cocaine Riot 2 featured guest appearances from rappers Action Bronson and Chevy Woods, among others. Cocaine Riot 2 featured the significant Montana and Drugz collaboration "I'm A Coke Boy". In 2012, he was featured on Wale's "Let a Nigga Know" and Vado's "You Ain't Good".


=== 2013: Cocaine Riot 3 ===
On January 4, 2013, Drugz released the official remix to "I'm a Coke Boy" featuring rappers Rick Ross and Diddy, along with French Montana. The remix would end up being ranked number 43 on Complex's list of the 50 best songs of 2013. Then on April 15, 2013, Drugz released his seventh solo mixtape Cocaine Riot 3, which featured the previously released remix of "I'm a Coke Boy". Cocaine Riot 3 featured additional guest appearances from Ace Hood, Juicy J, Yo Gotti, DJ Khaled, Roscoe Dash and others.Drugz told MTV that, "When I was making this mixtape, I was just trying to give the people something a little different from my normal. I basically started messing with a couple of different beats, but I kept it real New York. But I just really wanted to give 'em the other side of Chinx that they ain't been hearing in a while." The mixtape closes with "Maybe", a tribute to his deceased childhood friend Stack Bundles.In a positive review XXL stated, "For all its signs of promise, Cocaine Riot 3 also has some rookie mistakes. There’s also an over-reliance on features here that the mixtape could do without. The heavy guest list prevents Cocaine Riot 3 from being a landmark release, and so this mixtape ends up being more of a continuation of what we’ve already heard from Chinx Drug, rather than a step to the next level. Time will tell if he’s up for that challenge."Less than a week after the release of Cocaine Riot 3, Drugz released the music video for the remix to "I'm a Coke Boy". On May 14, 2013, Drugz released his four previous major solo mixtapes, Flight 2011, and the Cocaine Riot series for retail sale on iTunes. He was featured on Montana's debut studio album, Excuse My French on the deluxe edition track "Throw It in the Bag".
On May 22, 2013, "Right There" featuring Juicy J and French Montana was released as the first single from Cocaine Riot 3. "Up In Here" featuring Ace Hood would be released as the mixtape's second single on June 11, 2013. On August 12, 2013, Drugz released the music video for "Up In Here" featuring Ace Hood from Cocaine Riot 3, which was shot in Miami, Florida. That same day, French Montana announced that Coke Boys were working on their debut studio album as a group, along with a third mixtape to be released prior to the album.


=== 2013–15: I'll Take It From Here, Cocaine Riot 4 & 5, and Welcome To JFK ===
On October 4, 2013, Chinx Drugz, now just going by "Chinx", announced he would release an EP via NuSense Music Group and Coke Boys Records, executive produced by Rick Steel titled I'll Take It From Here, in November 2013. On October 28, 2013, Chinx released "Feelings" featuring French Montana, the first single from the EP. On November 26, 2013, it was revealed that Coke Boys would release their fourth mixtape in December 2013. That same day, Chinx released his debut retail project, the previously announced EP I'll Take It from Here.He featured prominently on Coke Boys fourth mixtape, Coke Boys 4, released on January 1, 2014. On February 1, 2014, Chinx released the music video for "Feelings". In April 2014, Chinx revealed that his next mixtape would be titled Cocaine Riot 4 and released on May 15, 2014. He released Cocaine Riot 5 on December 25, 2014. He told XXL that his debut studio album would be titled Welcome To JFK. He was being considered for the 2015 XXL Freshman Class.On June 2, 2015, Chinx's first official single for his posthumous album Welcome to JFK was released through eOne Music. The track is titled "On Your Body".


== Death ==
On May 17, 2015, NYPD officers responded to a 911 call in Briarwood, Queens around 4:00 a.m. There, they found Chinx and another victim in a car at Queens Boulevard and 84th Drive. Chinx was transported to Jamaica Medical Center in Queens with gunshot wounds to his torso, where he was pronounced dead, at age 31. Two men who were already incarcerated on other charges have been re-arrested in connection with the murder.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===


=== Extended plays ===


=== Mixtapes ===
2009: Hurry Up & Die Vol. 1 (Get Ya Casket On)
2010: Hurry Up & Die Vol. 2 (From The Cage To The Stage)
2010: Hurry Up & Die Vol. 3
2010: Coke Boys (with Coke Boys)
2011: Flight 2011 (with Harry Fraud)
2011: Cocaine Riot
2011: Coke Boys 2 (with Coke Boys)
2011: Coke Boys Run NY (with French Montana)
2012: Coke Boys 3 (with Coke Boys)
2012: Cocaine Riot 2
2013: Cocaine Riot 3
2014: Coke Boys 4 (with Coke Boys)
2014: CR4: Woulda Been Here Sooner
2014: CR5


=== Singles ===


==== As lead artist ====


==== As featured artist ====


== See also ==
List of murdered hip hop musicians
List of unsolved murders


== References ==Charles Turner (born October 21, 1962) better known as DJ Chuck Chillout, is an American hip hop DJ and producer.


== Biography ==
He began his career on New York City's WRKS 98.7 Kiss FM radio station in 1982. He was one of the first hip-hop artists to become established, which also includes Run-D.M.C., LL Cool J, Salt-n-Pepa, and Slick Rick. “Hip-hop was fun and energetic during this time. Hip-hop was just growing, so there was a lot of creativity and great live performances,” says Chuck. “Run-DMC and Whodini were some of the best live performances during this time”.After leaving Kiss FM in 1989, Chuck joined 107.5 WBLS FM in 1990 for two years. Chuck worked in 1995 by becoming one of the first DJs to play hip hop music in Japan. Hip-hop artists such as Busta Rhymes, A Tribe Called Quest, and Run-D.M.C. became known in Japan as a result. "Hip hop was very popular in Japan", said Chuck, "The people there knew the history of the artist I was playing as well as mine. Japanese people were totally into the culture".
In 1989, he released an album with emcee Kool Chip called Masters of the Rhythm, which was released by Mercury/PolyGram Records. The album featured two regional hits, "Rhythm is the Master" and "I’m Large."
In 1996, Chuck helped DMX for his debut smash hit, "Get at Me, Dog".
Chuck established Full Blast Promotions in 1999. "I established Full Blast Promotions in New Jersey because there was a need for a premier record pool in New Jersey," Chuck stated.
Chuck's affiliation with old- and new-school hip hop and R&B has helped him remain a popular DJ. Most recently, his participation in the Essence Music Festival and cruise helped his career.


== Discography ==
Albums

D.J. Chuck Chillout & Kool Chip—Masters Of The Rhythm (Mercury/PolyGram) 1989Singles & EPs

Chuck Chillout: Hip Hop On Wax—Volume 1 (Vintertainment) 1984
Mike and Glenn with Chuck Chillout—“No” (Vintertainment) 1986
D.J. Chuck Chillout & Kool Chip—“I’m Large” (Mercury/PolyGram) 1989
D.J. Chuck Chillout & Kool Chip—“Rhythm is the Master” (Mercury/PolyGram) 1989


== Sampling ==
Kool and the Gang "Music is The Message" - "Roll Call"
Cameo "Rigor Mortis" - "That's Life"
Cimande "Bra" - "Time to Rhyme"
Talking Heads "Once in a Lifetime" - "Rhythm is the Master"
Strafe: “Set it Off”—“Rhythm is the Master”
Incredible Bongo Band "Apache" - "The Mic I Grip"
Theme from James Bond—“I’m Large”


== References ==


== External links ==
DJ Chuck Chillout discography at DiscogsChylow Parker (July 19, 1969 – February 13, 2018), known by the stage name Chyskillz, was an American record producer, beatmaker, DJ, hardcore rapper, and a member of multi-platinum hardcore rap group Onyx.
Chyskillz was discovered by the late great hip hop legend Jam Master Jay of Run-D.M.C. who signed Onyx on his label JMJ Records. Onyx's debut album Bacdafucup, produced by Chyskillz, helped the group to become a nominee for "Favorite Rap/Hip-Hop New Artist" on American Music Awards and won "Best Rap Album" on Soul Train Music Awards.
During his career, Chylow Parker has worked with well-known artists such as Large Professor, Onyx, Run-D.M.C., Biohazard, Queen, Ice Cube, Shaquille O'Neal, LL Cool J, Public Enemy and many others. Many songs were re-mixed, re-mastered and re-released after 1997.
Five albums produced by Chyskillz, were certified as gold by the RIAA: Public Enemy Greatest Misses, Onyx Bacdafucup, Run-D.M.C. Down With The King, Shaquille O'Neal Shaq-Fu: Da Return and LL Cool J Mr. Smith. Two of them were certified as platinum: Onyx Bacdafucup and LL Cool J Mr. Smith.


== Early life ==
Chylow Parker was born in Manhattan, New York City, New York. At the age of 4 he and his family moved to Jamaica, Queens, New York. At the age of 10, Chyskillz and his family moved to Flushing, Queens. That's where he met Large Professor, Neek The Exotic and Mic Geronimo. Royal Flush used to live on the other side of the building he grew up in. 10-years-old, Chyskillz touched a pair of Technics turntables for the first time. At that moment he knew what he wanted to do with his life.In the 80's Chyskillz and Large Professor were a members of b-boy crew "Stay Fresh Crew". Chylow could do "Flare (acrobatic move)", "Airflare" and "Headspin". Chylow was a good graffiti writer, bombing the "I.S. 237" (Rachel Carson Intermediate School 237) roofs, you could see his tags "CHY" on Main Street (Flushing, Queens). Chylow also was a good BMX biker, rocking "Miami hoppers" before anyone else on Colden Playground (Flushing, Queens).


== Career ==


=== Jam Master Jay ===
Chyskillz started his music career deejaying for Large Professor, the founding member of Main Source. Chyskillz working on a recording studio as an engineer and producer on Neek The Exotic's project. One day he met Fredro Starr, who saw him deejaying. Fredro liked his beats, so he gave him his phone number. Onyx's manager, Jeff Harris, called him and invited him to Jam Master Jay's studio. When Chyskillz got with Jam Master Jay his first professional credit was the remix he did for Fam-Lee – "Runs in the Fam-Lee".


=== Onyx ===
Queens, New York City M.C. Neek The Exotic introduced DJ Chyskillz to the group Onyx in 1991. In Brian Coleman's book Check the Technique Fredro described how Onyx met their new producer:"...We met Chyskillz on Jamaica Avenue one day. We was buying weed at the weed spot and Chy was chasing my truck down the street, yelling, 'I got beats!' His stuff back then was jazzy, on some Tribe Called Quest shit, but it was hot. I knew he could put beats together right away. We brought him into our zone and made him do some grimy shit."
When Chyskillz met Fredro and Sticky they were already signed to Def Jam. The group was called Onyx and consisted of Fredro Starr, Sticky Fingaz, Suave (a.k.a. Sonny Seeza) and Big DS. When Chyskillz first got with Onyx, they already have another producer, but their stuff was a little bit more commercial and friendly. Chyskillz let Fredro hear some beats and it started from there. Chyskillz began making beats for Onyx and the collaboration just worked. The first song that Chyskillz ever did for Onyx was "Nigga Bridges". He did one song for them and Russell Simmons heard it and give Onyx an EP deal for 6 songs. But they did 10 songs on a budget of 6 songs, so Russell Simmons give them an album deal.
Chyskillz and Jam Master Jay co-produced the hip-hop group Onyx's multi-platinum selling debut album called Bacdafucup. The album is described as having a "tense, wired edge that amplifies the vividness of the threatening lyrics. Sonically, it has a hardcore East Coast/New York City cast, full of throbbing bass and screeching siren-like effects".Chyskillz drew notice for his work on hit songs like "Throw Ya Gunz" and "Slam" by Jam Master Jay of Run-DMC. Onyx's hit song Slam, which Chyskillz co-produced with Jam Master Jay, was included in music writer Bruce Pollock's Rock Song Index: The 7500 Most Important Songs for the Rock and Roll Era. It also made the Billboard Hot 100.Chyskillz left Onyx in the summer of 1993 cause they don't need him like a producer record. So Chyskillz signed with Wasteland Records.In May 2003 Chyskillz founded his own label "719 Music Inc.".


== Musical style ==
In an interview with NPR, hip hop artist and record producer Large Professor described working with Chyskillz on one of his first demos:
"...that's the style of production that we were doing at that time, where he would cut up "Synthetic Substitution" breakbeat on one tape. And you had the two and three tape decks, and he would put the tape in there. And then he would play that tape and overdub some bass lines."


== Last Year ==
In the last year of his life, Chyskillz actively traveled by plane, now and then visiting the cities of Dallas (Texas), Atlanta (Georgia), New York and Miramar (Florida). In all the cities he had friends and there he found new clients – rap artists, for whom he produced music. On the Facebook he uploaded videos he shot at the airport, marked "Where in the world is Chyskillz now" so that his friends would try to guess the city in which the producer is located, leaving comments under the post. And in the video he used to say: "It's about catch a flight, I'll might be in your city".


== Death ==
On July 5, 2017, Chyskillz was involved in a car accident and had surgery in October on his shoulder and was scheduled to possibly have back surgery soon. He was in a lot of pain and not working so much. He was in Queens, New York. On February 10, 2018 he was suffering a bad cold for two weeks and went to the hospital and they informed him that he had the flu, should never have gone to the studio and should have been resting. On February 12, Fredro and Sticky flew to New York. Fredro picked him up in Queens to go to the studio to do some remixing for the shows. Chyskillz was so pleased with this, he certainly agreed. After the session he came home late that evening around 2am. The next morning his family discovered him. Doctors say he suffered a heart attack. Next week he had to go to Miami, and then to Dallas for work. He just finished work on the project with De La Soul.


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===
With Onyx1993: BacdafucupSolo albums2014–2017: LP (unreleased)


=== Production ===
1991: Fam-Lee – "Runs in the Fam-Lee (It's The Fam-Lee Remix)" (from "Runs in the Fam-Lee (Vinyl Single)") – Remixed by Jam Master Jay & Chy-Skills
1992: Fam-Lee – "You're The One For Me (Hip-Hop Mix)" (from "You're The One For Me (Vinyl Single)") – X-Tra Flavor by Chy Skills
1992: Public Enemy – "Louder Than A Bomb (JMJ Telephone Tap Groove)" (from compilation album "Greatest Misses") – Remixing
1992: Bo$$ – "Livin' Loc'd" (from "Born Gangstaz") – Producer
1992: Onyx – "United States Ghetto (The U.S.G.)" – Producer
1992: Onyx – "Wake Up Dead, Nigga" (Throw Ya Gunz) (feat. Tek-9) – Version 1 (with different chorus at the beginning) – Producer
1992: Onyx – "Wake Up Dead, Nigga" (Throw Ya Gunz) (feat. Tek-9) – Version 2 – Producer
1993: Onyx – "Bacdafucup", "Bichasniguz", "Throw Ya Gunz", "Here 'N' Now", "Bus Dat Ass", "Da Mad Face Invasion", "Blac Vagina Finda", "Da Bounca Nigga", "Nigga Bridges" (co-producer), "Onyx Is Here", "Slam", "Stik 'N' Muve" (co-producer), "Bichasbootleguz", "Shifftee", "Phat ('N' All Dat)", "Getdafucout" (from "Bacdafucup") – Instrumentation, musician, producer
1993: Run-D.M.C. – "Three Little Indians", "Get Open" (from "Down with the King") – Producer
1993: Biohazard & Onyx – "Judgment Night" (from "Judgment Night (soundtrack)") – Producer
1993: Rumpletilskinz – "Mad M.F.'s" (from "What Is a Rumpletilskin?") – Mixing, producer
1993: Class A Felony – "I'm Not The Herb You're Lookin' 4 (CHY Skillz Remix)" (from "I'm Not The Herb You're Lookin' 4 (Vinyl Single)") – Remixing
1994: Kwazz E. Modoe – "Live The Life" (from Kwazz E. Modoe's demo tape) – Producer
1994: Queen – "Another One Bites The Dust" (Chyskillz Remix) (feat. Ice Cube, Hi-C (rapper) & Chyskillz) (from compilation album "BASIC Queen Bootlegs") – Remixing
1994: Shaquille O'Neal – "(So U Wanna Be) Hardcore", "Freaky Flow" (from "Shaq-Fu: Da Return") – Producer
1994: Sister Machine Gun – "Nothing (Chyskillz Re-Mix)" (from "Nothing (CD Single)") – Remixing
1995: Mic Geronimo – "Man of My Own" (from "The Natural") – Producer
1995: LL Cool J – "Mr. Smith" (from "Mr. Smith") – Producer
1996: Royal Flush – "Iced Down Medallions" (feat. Noreaga) (Chyskillz Remix) (from Various Artists – "Heartbeat" – Chill Factor Remixes) – Producer
1997: Royal Flush – "International Currency" (from "Ghetto Millionaire") – Producer
1997: Royal Flush – "Shines" (from "Ghetto Millionaire") – Mixing
1997: Royal Flush – "Family Problems" (from "Ghetto Millionaire") – Mixing
1997 – 2014: Producing of various hip-hop artists not subscribed to the top labels
2009: Skotadistes – "100 Mad Gang (Slam Again)" (feat. Fredro Starr) – Producer
2014: Sticky Fingaz – "I Don't Give A Shit" / "Ebenezer Scrooge" (feat. N.O.R.E.) – Producer


== References ==


== External links ==
Chyskillz discography at Discogs 
Chyskillz at AllMusicChristopher Daniel Soriano Jr. (born January 4, 1997), better known by his stage name CJ, is an American rapper from Staten Island, New York. He is best known for his 2020 breakout single "Whoopty", which peaked at number 3 on the UK Singles Chart and at number 10 on the US Billboard Hot 100. The song was later included on his debut EP, Loyalty over Royalty, released in February 2021.


== Career ==
Soriano began rapping as a hobby at the age of 9, and began recording and uploading songs to YouTube and SoundCloud at the age of 14.In July 2020, Soriano self-released his first commercial breakthrough single, titled "Whoopty". The song contains a sample from Arijit Singh's "Sanam Re", with CJ rapping over the beat that he found on YouTube (later the rights were cleared). The song peaked at number 10 on the US Billboard Hot 100 in February 2021, and the UK top three. He also reached the top of the Billboard Emerging Artists chart. He later signed a record deal with Warner Records and his uncle, record executive, James Cruz, on his record label, called Cruz Control Entertainment. He stated that various labels reached out to him, however, Warner had the "best situation". On January 26, 2021, CJ released the single, titled "Bop", the follow-up to "Whoopty". His debut extended play, titled Loyalty Over Royalty was released on February 19, 2021. It was executive produced by French Montana.


== Influences ==
His music influences include 50 Cent, Jay-Z, Wu-Tang Clan, and Pop Smoke.


== Personal life ==
He is of Puerto Rican descent.


== Discography ==


=== Extended plays ===


=== Singles ===


== Notes ==


== References ==Michael Thomas Volpe (born May 12, 1987), known professionally as Clams Casino, is an American record producer and songwriter from Nutley, New Jersey. Volpe is currently signed to Columbia Records and Sony Music. He has produced tracks for artists such as A$AP Rocky, Lil B, Vince Staples, Joji, The Weeknd, and Mac Miller and has also remixed works by Big K.R.I.T., Washed Out, and Lana Del Rey.


== Career ==
A resident of Hasbrouck Heights, New Jersey, Volpe got his start in music tinkering with keyboards while he was a student at Nutley High School.Volpe's official debut EP Rainforest was released on Tri Angle Records in 2011. His Instrumentals mixtape was released on March 7, 2011, followed by the release of Instrumentals 2 on June 5, 2012 and Instrumentals 3 in 2013. The mixtapes were distributed for free through his website.
Volpe contributed a score for Locomotor, a work choreographed by his cousin Stephen Petronio released in 2014. He released his debut studio album 32 Levels through Columbia Records in 2016. He followed it up with his Instrumentals 4 mixtape, released in 2017.
In April 2020, Clams Casino cleared the Imogen Heap sample for his instrumental "I'm God", which first appeared on Lil B's 2009 album 6 Kiss. The song remains his most popular, with over 25 million views on YouTube.


== Musical style ==
Volpe's music has been described as "[bringing] together conventional hip-hop drums, a sensitive ear for off-to-the-side melodies, and an overdose of oddly moving atmosphere."


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===


=== Extended plays ===


=== Mixtapes ===


=== Compilations ===


=== Singles ===


==== As lead artist ====


==== As featured artist ====


== References ==


== External links ==
Official Web site
Official Facebook page
clammyclams on SoundCloud 
ClamsCasinoMusic's channel on YouTube
Clams Casino discography at DiscogsSean Love Combs (born Sean John Combs; November 4, 1969), also known by his stage names Puff Daddy, P. Diddy, or Diddy, is an American rapper, record producer, record executive and actor. Born in Harlem, Combs worked as a talent director at Uptown Records before founding his own record label, Bad Boy Records, in 1993. Combs has produced and cultivated artists such as the Notorious B.I.G., Mary J. Blige, and Usher.
Combs' debut album, No Way Out (1997), has been certified seven times platinum. The album was followed up with Forever (1999), The Saga Continues... (2001), and Press Play (2006). In 2009, Combs formed the musical group Diddy – Dirty Money with singers Kalenna Harper and Dawn Richard; they released their collaborative album Last Train to Paris. In September 2023, Combs released his fifth studio album, The Love Album: Off the Grid.
Combs has won three Grammy Awards and two MTV Video Music Awards and is the producer of MTV's Making the Band. In 1998, Combs founded the clothing retailer Sean John. He was nominated for the Council of Fashion Designers of America award for Menswear Designer of the Year in 2000 and won in 2004. He has been the brand ambassador for vodka retailer Cîroc since 2007, and co-founded the television network and news website Revolt in 2013. In 2022, Forbes estimated his net worth at US$1 billion.


== Early life ==
Sean John Combs was born in the Harlem neighborhood of New York City on November 4, 1969. Raised in Mount Vernon, New York, his mother Janice Combs (née Smalls) was a model and teacher's assistant, and his father, Melvin Earl Combs, served in the U.S. Air Force and was an associate of convicted New York drug dealer Frank Lucas. At age 33, Melvin was shot to death while sitting in his car on Central Park West, when Sean was two years old.Combs graduated from Mount Saint Michael Academy in 1987. He played football for the academy, and his team won a division title in 1986. Combs said he was given the nickname "Puff" as a child, because he would "huff and puff" when he was angry.Combs was a business major at Howard University but left after his sophomore year. In 2014, he returned to Howard University to receive an Honorary Doctorate in Humanities and to deliver the university's 146th Commencement Address.


== Career ==


=== 1990–1996: Career beginnings ===
Combs became an intern at New York's Uptown Records in 1990. While working as a talent director at Uptown, he helped develop Jodeci and Mary J. Blige. In his college days Combs had a reputation for throwing parties, some of which attracted up to a thousand participants. In 1991, Combs promoted an AIDS fundraiser with Heavy D held at the City College of New York (CCNY) gymnasium, following a charity basketball game. The event was oversold, and a stampede occurred in which nine people died.In 1993, after being fired from Uptown, Combs established his new label Bad Boy Entertainment as a joint venture with Arista Records, taking then-newcomer Christopher Wallace, better known as the Notorious B.I.G., with him. Both Wallace and Craig Mack quickly released hit singles, followed by successful LPs, particularly Wallace's Ready to Die. Combs signed more acts to Bad Boy, including Carl Thomas, Faith Evans, 112, Total, and Father MC. The Hitmen, his in-house production team, worked with Jodeci, Mary J. Blige, Usher, Lil' Kim, TLC, Mariah Carey, Boyz II Men, SWV, Aretha Franklin, and others.Mase and the Lox joined Bad Boy just as a widely publicized rivalry with the West Coast's Death Row Records was beginning. Combs and Wallace were criticized and parodied by Tupac Shakur and Suge Knight in songs and interviews during the mid-1990s. During 1994–1995, Combs produced several songs for TLC's CrazySexyCool, which finished the decade as number 25 on Billboard's list of top pop albums of the decade.


=== 1997–1998: "Puff Daddy" and No Way Out ===
In 1997, under the name Puff Daddy, Combs recorded his first commercial vocal work as a rapper. His debut single, "Can't Nobody Hold Me Down", spent 28 weeks on the Billboard Hot 100 chart, peaking at number one. His debut album, No Way Out, was released on July 22, 1997, through Bad Boy Records. Originally titled Hell up in Harlem, the album underwent several changes after the Notorious B.I.G. was killed on March 9, 1997. Several of the label's artists made guest appearances on the album. No Way Out was a significant success, particularly in the United States, where it reached number one on the Billboard 200 in its first week of release, selling 561,000 copies.The album produced five singles: "I'll Be Missing You", a tribute to the Notorious B.I.G., was the first rap song to debut at number one on the Billboard Hot 100; it remained at the top of the chart for eleven consecutive weeks and topped several other charts worldwide. Four other singles – "Can't Nobody Hold Me Down", "It's All About the Benjamins", "Been Around the World", and "Victory" – were also released. Combs collaborated with Jimmy Page on the song "Come with Me" for the 1998 film Godzilla.The album earned Combs five nominations at the 40th Grammy Awards in 1998, and would go on to win the Grammy Award for Best Rap Album. On September 7, 2000, the album was certified septuple platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America for sales of over 7 million copies. In 1997, Combs was sued for landlord neglect by Inge Bongo. Combs denied the charges. By the late 1990s, he was being criticized for watering down and overly commercializing hip hop, and for using too many guest appearances, samples, and interpolations of past hits in his new songs.


=== 1999–2000: Forever, and Club New York shooting ===
In April 1999, Combs was charged with assaulting Steve Stoute of Interscope Records. Stoute was the manager for Nas, with whom Combs had filmed a video earlier that year for the song "Hate Me Now". Combs was concerned that the video, which featured a shot of Nas and Combs being crucified, was blasphemous. He asked for his scenes on the cross to be pulled, but after the video aired unedited on MTV on April 15, Combs visited Stoute's offices and injured Stoute. Combs was charged with second-degree assault and criminal mischief, and was sentenced to attend a one-day anger management class.Forever, Combs' second solo studio album, was released by Bad Boy Records on August 24, 1999, in North America, and in the UK on the following day. It reached number two on the Billboard 200 and number one on the Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums chart, where it remained for one week before being knocked off by Mary J. Blige's fourth album, Mary. The album received positive to mixed reviews from music critics and spawned three singles that have charted on the Billboard charts. It peaked at number four on the Canadian Albums Chart, Combs' highest-charting album in that country.On December 27, 1999, Combs, his then-girlfriend Jennifer Lopez, and his protégé rapper Shyne were at Club New York in Times Square in Manhattan when gunfire broke out. A prosecutor said that the incident was sparked by an argument at the club between Combs and another patron. After a police investigation, Combs and Shyne were arrested for weapons violations and other charges. Combs was charged with four weapons-related charges and with bribing his driver, Wardel Fenderson, to claim ownership of his gun.With a gag order in place, the highly publicized trial began. Combs' attorneys were Johnnie L. Cochran Jr. and Benjamin Brafman. Combs was found not guilty on all charges; Shyne was convicted on five of his eight charges and sentenced to ten years in prison. Combs and Lopez broke up shortly after. A lawsuit filed by Fenderson, who said he suffered emotional damage after the shooting, was settled in February 2004. Lawyers for both sides, having agreed to keep the settlement terms secret, said the matter had been "resolved to the satisfaction of all parties".


=== 2001–2004: "P. Diddy" and The Saga Continues ===
Combs changed his stage name from "Puff Daddy" to "P. Diddy" in 2001. The gospel album, Thank You, which had been completed just before the beginning of the weapons trial, was due to be released in March that year, but remains unreleased as of October 2018. He appeared as a drug dealer in the film Made and starred with Halle Berry, Heath Ledger, and Billy Bob Thornton in Monster's Ball (both in 2001).He was arrested for driving with a suspended license in Florida. Combs began working with a series of atypical (for him) artists. For a short period of time, he was the manager of Kelis; they have a collaboration titled "Let's Get Ill". He was an opening act for 'N Sync on their Spring 2002 Celebrity Tour, and he signed California-based pop girl group Dream to his record label. Combs was a producer of the soundtrack album for the film Training Day (2001).In June 2001, Combs ended Bad Boy's joint venture with Arista Records, gaining full control of Bad Boy, its catalogue, and its roster of artists. The Saga Continues..., released on July 10 in North America, was the last studio album released by the joint venture. The album reached number 2 on the Billboard 200 and the Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums charts, and was eventually certified Platinum. It is the only studio album under the P. Diddy name, and the first album by Sean Combs not to feature any guest appearances by Jay-Z or Lil Kim. Combs was executive producer of the reality TV show Making the Band, which appeared on MTV from 2002 to 2009.The show involves interviewing candidates and creating musical acts that would then enter the music business. Acts who got their start this way include Da Band, Danity Kane, Day26, and Donnie Klang. In 2003, Combs ran in the New York City Marathon, raising $2 million for the educational system of the city of New York. On March 10, 2004, he appeared on The Oprah Winfrey Show to discuss the marathon, which he finished in four hours and eighteen minutes. In 2004, Combs headed the campaign "Vote or Die" for the 2004 presidential election. On February 1, 2004, Combs (as P. Diddy) performed at the Super Bowl XXXVIII halftime show.


=== 2005–2009: "Diddy" and Press Play ===
On August 16, 2005, Combs announced on Today that he was altering his stage name yet again; he would be calling himself "Diddy". Combs said fans did not know how to address him, which led to confusion. In November 2005, London-based musical artist and DJ Richard Dearlove, who had been performing under the name "Diddy" since 1992 –  nine years before Combs started using even "P. Diddy" –  sought an injunction in the High Court of Justice in London. He accepted an out-of-court settlement of £10,000 in damages and more than £100,000 in costs. Combs can no longer use the name Diddy in the UK, where he is still known as P. Diddy. An assault charge against Combs filed by Michigan television host Rogelio Mills was resolved in Combs' favor in 2005.Combs starred in the 2005 film Carlito's Way: Rise to Power. He played Walter Lee Younger in the 2004 Broadway revival of A Raisin in the Sun and the television adaptation that aired in February 2008. In 2005, Combs sold half of his record company to the Warner Music Group. He hosted the 2005 MTV Video Music Awards and was named one of the 100 Most Influential People of 2005 by Time magazine. He was mentioned in the country song "Play Something Country" by Brooks & Dunn: the lyricist says he "didn't come to hear P. Diddy", which is rhymed with "something thumpin' from the city".In 2006, when Combs refused to release musician Mase from his contractual obligations to allow him to join the group G-Unit, 50 Cent recorded a diss song, "Hip-Hop". The lyrics imply that Combs knew the identity of the Notorious B.I.G.'s murderer. The two later resolved the feud.Combs released his first album in four years, Press Play, on October 17, 2006, on the Bad Boy Records label. The album, featuring guest appearances by many popular artists, debuted at number one on the U.S. Billboard 200 chart with sales of over 173,009. Its singles "Come to Me" and "Last Night" both reached the top ten of the Billboard Hot 100. The album became available to preview on MTV's The Leak on October 10, 2006, a week before being sold in stores. Press Play received mixed to positive reviews from critics, and was certified Gold on the RIAA ratings. On September 18, 2007, Combs teamed up with 50 Cent and Jay-Z for the "Forbes I Get Money Billion Dollar Remix".In March 2008, the Los Angeles Times claimed that the Notorious B.I.G. and Combs orchestrated the 1994 robbery and shooting of Tupac, substantiating the claim with supposed FBI documents; the newspaper later retracted the story, acknowledging that the documents had been fabricated. Dexter Isaac, an associate of record management executive Jimmy Henchman, confessed in 2012 that he had shot Tupac on Henchman's orders.In June 2008, Combs' representative denied rumors of another name change. Combs ventured into reality television in August 2008 with the premiere of his VH1 series I Want to Work for Diddy. He appeared—credited under his real name—in two episodes of Season 7 of CSI: Miami: "Presumed Guilty" and "Sink or Swim", in the role of lawyer Derek Powell.


=== 2010–2013: Diddy – Dirty Money and acting ===
Combs created a rap supergroup in 2010 known as the Dream Team. The group consists of Combs, Rick Ross, DJ Khaled, Fat Joe, Busta Rhymes, Red Café, and Fabolous. Combs made an appearance at comedian Chris Gethard's live show in January 2010 at the Upright Citizens Brigade Theatre in New York City. In June 2010, Combs played a role (credited as Sean Combs) in the comedy film Get Him to the Greek, as Sergio Roma, a record company executive. An Entourage series representative announced that Combs would guest star on an episode during the 2010 season.Recruiting singers Dawn Richard and Kalenna Harper, Combs formed the female duo Diddy – Dirty Money in 2009. The duo's first album, Last Train to Paris, was released by on December 13, 2010. The release was preceded by four singles "Angels", "Hello Good Morning", "Loving You No More", and "Coming Home", which experienced mixed success on the Billboard Hot 100. "Coming Home" was the most successful of the songs, peaking at number eleven on the U.S. Hot 100, number four in the UK, and number seven in Canada. Combs produced the group, and often performed with them. On March 10, 2011, Diddy and Dirty Money performed "Coming Home" live on American Idol.On April 18, 2011, Combs appeared in season one of Hawaii Five-0, guest starring as an undercover NYPD detective. In November 2012 Combs appeared in an episode of the eighth season of the American sitcom It's Always Sunny in Philadelphia.


=== 2014–present: MMM (Money Making Mitch), No Way Out 2, and The Love Album: Off the Grid ===
On February 26, 2014, Combs premiered "Big Homie", featuring Rick Ross and French Montana, as the first single from his mixtape MMM (Money Making Mitch), which was originally scheduled to be released that year. The song was released for digital download on March 24, and two days later the trailer for the music video was released. The full version of the music video was released on March 31. Combs used his former stage name Puff Daddy for the album. MMM was released as a free mixtape album of 12 tracks on November 4, 2015. In 2014 Combs and Guy Gerber announced that their joint album 11 11 would be available for free download. A new single called "Finna Get Loose" featuring Combs and Pharrell Williams was released on June 29, 2015.In July 2015, Bad Boy Entertainment artist Gizzle told the press that she is collaborating with Combs on what she describes as his last album, titled No Way Out 2, a sequel to his 1997 debut. She describes the music as unique: "The mindset is to just be classic and to be epic. And to really live up to that ... we know it's a tall order, but we welcome the challenge." In April 2016, Combs announced that after this last album and tour, he plans to retire from the music industry to focus on acting.On May 20 and 21, 2016, Combs launched a tour of Bad Boy Records' biggest names to celebrate the 20th anniversary of the label. The documentary Can't Stop, Won't Stop: A Bad Boy Story, covering the two shows at the Barclays Center in Brooklyn as well as behind-the-scenes events, was released on June 23, 2017. The show toured to an additional twenty venues across the United States and Canada.On November 5, 2017, Combs announced that he would be going by the name Love, stating "My new name is Love, aka Brother Love". Two days later, he told the press he had been joking, but on January 3, 2018, he announced on Jimmy Kimmel Live! that he had changed his mind again, and will be using the new name after all. The change became official in 2022.In 2019, Combs announced on Twitter that Making the Band would return to MTV in 2020.Combs executive-produced Nigerian singer Burna Boy's album, Twice as Tall, released on August 14, 2020.In 2022, Combs hosted the 2022 Billboard Music Awards. Shortly afterwards, he announced the startup of a new record label, Love Records as a one-album recording deal with Motown.On August 22, 2023, Combs released a teaser trailer on social media for his sixth studio album The Love Album: Off the Grid, which was released on September 15, 2023.


== Business career ==
Fortune magazine listed Combs at number twelve on their top 40 of entrepreneurs under 40 in 2002. Forbes Magazine estimated that for the year ending May 2017, Combs earned $130 million, ranking him number one among entertainers. In 2022, his estimated net worth was US$1 billion.


=== Sean John ===
In 1998, Combs started a clothing line, Sean John. It was nominated for the Council of Fashion Designers of America (CFDA) award for Menswear Designer of the Year in 2000, and won in 2004. California billionaire Ronald Burkle invested $100 million into the company in 2003.Also in 2003, the National Labor Committee revealed that factories producing the clothing in Honduras were violating Honduran labor laws. Among the accusations were that workers were subjected to body searches and involuntary pregnancy tests. Bathrooms were locked and access tightly controlled. Employees were forced to work overtime and were paid sweatshop wages. Charles Kernaghan of the National Labor Committee told The New York Times that "Sean Puff Daddy obviously has a lot of clout, he can literally do a lot overnight to help these workers."Combs responded with an extensive investigation, telling reporters "I'm as pro-worker as they get". On February 14, 2004, Kernaghan announced that improvements had been implemented at the factory, including adding air conditioning and water purification systems, firing the most abusive supervisors, and allowing the formation of a labor union. In late 2006, the department store Macy's removed Sean John jackets from their shelves when they discovered that the clothing was made using raccoon dog fur. Combs had not known the jackets were made with genuine fur, but as soon as he was alerted, he had production stopped.In November 2008, Combs added a men's perfume called "I Am King" to the Sean John brand. The fragrance, dedicated to Barack Obama, Muhammad Ali, and Martin Luther King Jr., featured model Bar Refaeli in its advertisements. In early 2016, Sean John introduced the brand's GIRLS collection.


=== Other ventures ===
Combs is the head of Combs Enterprises, an umbrella company for his portfolio of businesses. In addition to his clothing line, Combs owned two restaurants called Justin's, named after his son. The original New York location closed in September 2007; the Atlanta location closed in June 2012. He is the designer of the Dallas Mavericks alternate jersey. In October 2007, Combs agreed to help develop the Cîroc vodka brand for a 50 percent share of the profits. Combs acquired the Enyce clothing line from Liz Claiborne for $20 million on October 21, 2008.Combs has a major equity stake in Revolt TV, a television network that also has a film production branch. It began broadcasting in 2014. In February 2015, Combs teamed up with actor Mark Wahlberg and businessman Ronald Burkle of Yucaipa Companies to purchase a majority holding in Aquahydrate, a calorie-free beverage for athletes. John Cochran, former president of Fiji Water, is CEO of the company.In 2019, Combs became a major investor in PlayVS, which provides an infrastructure for competitive gaming in US high schools. The company was also backed by Twitch co-founder Kevin Lin.


== Personal life ==


=== Family ===
Combs is the father of seven children. His first biological child, Justin, was born in 1993 to fashion designer and stylist Misa Hylton. Justin attended UCLA on a football scholarship; he graduated in 2016.Combs had an on-again, off-again relationship with Kimberly Porter (1970–2018), which lasted from 1994 to 2007. He raised and adopted Quincy (born 1991), Porter's son from a previous relationship with singer-producer and Combs' rival, Al B. Sure! Together, they had a son, Christian (born 1998), and twin daughters, D'Lila Star and Jessie James (born 2006). Christian Combs raps under the alias, King Combs. Porter died of pneumonia on November 15, 2018.Five months before the birth of his twins, Combs' daughter, Chance, was born to Sarah Chapman. He took legal responsibility for Chance in October 2007.Combs was in an eleven-year relationship with Cassie Ventura from 2007 to 2018.Combs' sons, Quincy and Justin, both appeared on MTV's My Super Sweet 16. Combs threw Quincy a celebrity-studded party and gave him two cars as his 16th birthday present. For Justin's 16th birthday, Combs presented him with a $360,000 Maybach car.Combs' seventh child was born on October 15, 2022, a daughter named Love Sean Combs. Her mother is Dana Tran.In November 2022, Diddy and son Christian became the first father-son duo to have simultaneous #1 hits. Diddy reached the top of the Billboard Adult R&B Airplay chart with "Gotta Move On," while Christian, under his stage name King Combs, topped Mediabase's US Urban Radio chart with "Can't Stop Won't Stop," featuring Kodak Black.Combs owns a home in Alpine, New Jersey, which he purchased for $7 million.


=== Charity work and honors ===
Combs founded Daddy's House Social Programs, an organization to help inner city youth, in 1995. Programs include tutoring, life skills classes, and an annual summer camp. Along with Jay-Z, he pledged $1 million to help support victims of Hurricane Katrina in 2005, and donated clothing from his Sean John line to victims. He has donated computers and books to New York schools.In 1998, he received a Golden Plate Award from the American Academy of Achievement. Chicago Mayor Richard M. Daley named October 13, 2006, as "Diddy Day" in honor of Combs' charity work. In 2008, Combs was honored with a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame, the first male rapper to be so honored.In 2014, Combs received an honorary doctorate from Howard University, where he gave the commencement speech for its 146th commencement ceremony. In his speech, Combs acknowledged that his experiences as a Howard student positively influenced his life. In 2016, Combs donated $1 million to Howard University to establish the Sean Combs Scholarship Fund to help students who are unable to pay their tuition.In 2022, Combs announced during his BET Lifetime Achievement Award acceptance speech that he will be donating $1 million each to Howard University and Jackson State University.


=== Religious views ===
Combs was raised Catholic, and was an altar server as a boy. In 2008, he told The Daily Telegraph that he does not adhere to any specific religious denomination. He said, "I just follow right from wrong, so I could pray in a synagogue or a mosque or a church. I believe that there is only one God."On July 3, 2020, Combs invited his Twitter followers to view a 3-hour YouTube video posted by Louis Farrakhan. In the video Farrakhan made multiple comments and repeatedly used the phrase "Synagogue of Satan". The video was removed from YouTube for violating its policy against hate speech.In response to comedian Nick Cannon being fired on July 14, 2020, from ViacomCBS for espousing anti-Semitic views, Combs tweeted that Cannon should "come home to RevoltTv" saying "We got your back and love you and what you have done for the culture."


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===
No Way Out (1997)
Forever (1999)
The Saga Continues... (2001)
Press Play (2006)
The Love Album: Off the Grid (2023)


=== Collaborative albums ===
Last Train to Paris with Dirty Money (2010)


== Awards and nominations ==


=== NAACP Image Awards ===


=== BET Awards ===


=== BET Hip Hop Awards ===


=== MTV Europe Music Awards ===


=== MTV Movie & TV Awards ===


=== MTV Video Music Awards ===


=== Grammy Awards ===


=== Rolling Stone's 500 Greatest Albums of All Time ===


=== Other awards ===
In 2021, Combs was among the inaugural inductees into the Black Music and Entertainment Walk of Fame.In June 2022, Combs received the BET Lifetime Achievement Award.


== Filmography ==
Made (2001)
Monster's Ball (2001)
2005 MTV Video Music Awards (2005)
Seamless (2005)
Carlito's Way: Rise to Power (2005)
A Raisin in the Sun (2008)
CSI Miami: episode "Sink or Swim" (2009)
CSI Miami: episode "Presumed Guilty" (2009)
Notorious (2009): Archive footage
Get Him to the Greek (2010)
I'm Still Here (2010)
Hawaii Five-0: episode "Hoʻopaʻi" (2011)
It's Always Sunny in Philadelphia (TV series) (2012)
Draft Day (2014)
Muppets Most Wanted (2014)
Black-ish (TV series) (2015)
Can't Stop, Won't Stop: A Bad Boy Story (2017)
The Defiant Ones (2017)
Mary J. Blige's My Life (2021)
2022 Billboard Music Awards (2022)


== Tours ==
No Way Out Tour (1997–1998)
Forever Tour (2000)


== References ==


== Sources ==
Harrison, Thomas (2011). Music of the 1990s. American History Through Music. Santa Barbara, CA: Greenwood. ISBN 978-0-313-37942-0.
Jones, Jen (2014). Sean "Diddy" Combs: A Biography of a Music Mogul. African-American Icons. Berkeley Heights, NJ: Enslow. ISBN 978-0-7660-4296-4.
Traugh, Susan M. (2010). Sean Combs. People in the News. Farmington Hills, MI: Lucent Books. ISBN 978-1-4205-0237-4.


== External links ==

Official website
Sean Combs at AllMusic 
Sean Combs at IMDbDexter Raymond Mills Jr., better known by his stage name Consequence, is an American rapper from Queens, New York City, New York. He is best known for his collaborative work with A Tribe Called Quest and Kanye West.


== Career ==
Consequence debuted in 1996, appearing several times on A Tribe Called Quest's fourth album Beats, Rhymes, and Life, as he is the cousin of member Q-Tip. In March 2007, he released his debut album Don't Quit Your Day Job!, under Columbia Records and Kanye West's GOOD Music. Consequence left GOOD Music in 2011, on bad terms, after being signed with the label since 2005. He and West later reconciled, despite Consequence speaking ill of West. Consequence consequently launched his own record label, Band Camp Records, following his departure from GOOD Music.


== Personal life ==
In 2020, Consequence came forth about his battle with lupus.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===


=== Mixtapes ===
The Cons Vol. 1: All Sales Are Final (2002)
The Cons Vol. 2: Make The Game Come To You (2003)
Take 'Em To The Cleaners (2004)
A Tribe Called Quence (1995-2004) (2005)
The Cons Vol. 3: Da Comeback Kid (2005)
The Cons Vol. 4: Finish What You Started (2006)
The Wait Is Over Vol. 1: The Best Of The Cons (2006)
The Cons Vol. 5: Refuse 2 Die (2007)
Movies on Demand (2010)
Movies on Demand II (2011)
Movies on Demand III (2011)
Curb Certified (2011)
Movies on Demand IV (2013)


=== Singles ===


==== As featured artist ====
Notes


=== Guest appearances ===
A Tribe Called Quest – "The Chase, Part II" on Award Tour 12" single B-side (1993)
A Tribe Called Quest – "Glamour and Glitz" on The Show soundtrack (1995)
A Tribe Called Quest – "Phony Rappers", "Motivators", "Jam", "Mind Power", "Baby Phife's Return", "Word Play", "Stressed Out" on Beats, Rhymes and Life (1996)
Kanye West – "Spaceship" on The College Dropout (2004)
Common – "They Say" (Alternate version) (2005)
Rell – "Real Love" (2004)
Kanye West – "Electric Relaxation" (Freshmen Adjustment) (2005)
Kanye West – "Gone" on Late Registration (2005)
Miri Ben-Ari – "I've Been Waiting on You" on The Hip-Hop Violinist (2005)
Consequence – "Couped Up" feat. DJ Swivel & Chris Stylez on DJ Whoo Kid – BET Awards Mixtape '06, Clinton Sparks – The Cons Vol. 4 (2006)
Talib Kweli – "Engine Runnin'" on Liberation (2006)
Kanye West – "The Good, The Bad, and the Ugly" on Prelude to Graduation Mixtape (2007)
Kanye West – "Don't Forget 'Em" on "Can't Tell Me Nothing" (2007)
Beyoncé – "Suga Mama (Remix)" (2007)
Statik Selektah – "Express Yourself" (with Termanology & Talib Kweli) (2007)
Statik Selektah – "Mr Popularity" (2008)
AZ – "Heavy in da Game" (2008)
Kid Cudi – "Buggin' Out 2009" (2009)
Nefew – "Biko" on Homesick (2009)
Kanye West – "Chain Heavy" on G.O.O.D. Fridays (2010)
Statik Selektah – "Life Is Short" (2010)
Beyoncé – "Party" (production with Kanye West) on 4 (2011)
Son of Light – "Love & Hate" (2012)
A Tribe Called Quest – "Whateva Will Be", "Mobius" (with Busta Rhymes), "Black Spasmodic", "The Killing Season" (with Kanye West and Talib Kweli) – We Got It from Here... Thank You 4 Your Service (2016)
Danny Brown – "Combat" (with Q-Tip) – U Know What I'm Sayin? (2019)


== Filmography ==


== References ==Demond Price (born February 16, 1982), known professionally as Conway the Machine (or simply Conway), is an American rapper. Alongside his paternal half-brother, Westside Gunn and cousin, Benny the Butcher. Conway was a member of Griselda Records. On February 21, 2022, Conway announced his departure from Griselda Records.


== History ==


=== 2012–2019: Early mixtapes and G.O.A.T. ===
At age 23, Conway spent some time in jail, which he has cited as a motivation for weaning from a gangster lifestyle to focus on his career in music.In 2012, Conway was shot in the head, neck and shoulder; his face was partially paralyzed, giving him a signature slur.In 2014, Westside Gunn founded Griselda Records, through which Conway and Westside Gunn would self-release their own projects and the works of artists such as Benny the Butcher and Mach-Hommy. In 2015, Conway released his first two official mixtape projects through Griselda Records, The Devil's Reject and Reject 2. Conway and Westside Gunn also released two collaborative EPs through London-based record label Daupe!, the first of which was 2015's Hall & Nash, followed by 2016's Griselda Ghost. In April 2016, during Mobb Deep and Smif-N-Wessun's "Hell On Earth" tour, Conway was introduced to Prodigy of Mobb Deep, who would become one of his earliest notable collaborators and supporters.On March 3, 2017, Griselda Records signed a deal with Eminem's Shady Records. On October 10, 2017, Conway contributed an a cappella rap verse to the 2017 BET Hip Hop Awards Shady cypher. The same year, Complex included Westside Gunn and Conway in their list of "15 Best Unofficial Rap Duos in the Game", as well as two of the "17 Artists to Watch in 2017".Following Griselda's deal with Shady Records, Conway's first official release was G.O.A.T. on December 21, 2017, which included production from Griselda's in-house producer Daringer and The Alchemist, and featured Royce Da 5'9", Raekwon, Prodigy, Styles P and Lloyd Banks. Earlier in 2017, he released a collaborative mixtape with DJ Green Lantern titled More Steroids.


=== 2019–present: Studio albums ===
On May 16, 2019, Conway, Benny The Butcher and Westside Gunn released their first single with DJ Premier titled "Headlines".Conway released "Bang", at the time expected to be the first single from his album God Don't Make Mistakes, alongside Eminem on July 19, 2019. God Don't Make Mistakes had been intended to be Conway's debut studio album, and Westside Gunn had stated it was "90 percent complete" in 2018; however, Conway's first studio album would instead be the project From King to a God, which he released on September 11, 2020. During this period, Conway continued releasing mixtapes and collaborative albums as well.
God Don't Make Mistakes was ultimately released on February 25, 2022, as Conway's second studio album.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===


=== Collaboration albums ===
Organized Grime (released in collaboration with Trillmatic Goods) (2019)
Lulu (with The Alchemist) (2020)
No One Mourns the Wicked (with Big Ghost) (2020)
If It Bleeds It Can Be Killed (with Big Ghost) (2021)
Organized Grime 2 (released in collaboration with Trillmatic Goods) (2022)
What Has Been Blessed Cannot Be Cursed (with Big Ghost) (2022)
Pain Provided Profit (with Jae Skeese) (2023)
Speshal Machinery  (with 38 Spesh) (2023)


=== Compilation albums ===
Drumwork: The Album (with Drumwork Music Group) (2023)


=== Mixtapes ===
Welcome 2 the Badside (2007)
The Transition (2007)
T2: The Machine (2008)
The Worst of Conway (2010)
Welcome Back (2 da Badside) (2010)
Amerikan Greed (2012)
PhysiKal Therapy (2014)
The Devil's Reject (2015)
Reject 2 (2015)
G.O.A.T. (2017)
Blakk Tape (2018)
Everybody Is F.O.O.D (2018)
EIF 2: Eat What U Kill (2018)
Everybody Is F.O.O.D 3 (2019)
Look What I Became (2019)
La Maquina (2021)
The Missing Bricks (2021)
Greetings Earthlings (2022)


=== Collaboration mixtapes ===
Who Wants What (with Street Entertainment) (2005)
Bang Bang (with Street Entertainment) (2005)
The Pre-Season (with Buff City Music Group) (2012)
Hall and Nash (with Westside Gunn as Hall 'N Nash) (2015)
Griselda Ghost (with Westside Gunn as Hall 'N Nash, produced by Big Ghost LTD) (2015)
Hell Still On Earth (with Prodigy)  (2016)
Reject on Steroids (with DJ Green Lantern) (2017)
More Steroids (with DJ Green Lantern) (2017)
Death By Misadventure (with Sonnyjim) (2018)
Untitled Drums EP (with Imported Goods) (2018)
Hidden Drums (with Drumwork Music Group) (2023)
Conductor Machine (with Conductor Williams) (2023)
PALERMO (with Wun Two) (2023)


=== With Griselda ===
Don't Get Scared Now (2016)
WWCD (2019)


=== Music videos ===


== References ==Christopher Douglass Roney (born December 15, 1969), known by the stage name Cool C, is an American former rapper active in the late 1980s. He is also known for his involvement in the murder of Philadelphia Police officer Lauretha Vaird during a bank robbery in January 1996, for which he was sentenced to death. He is currently on death row.


== Career ==


=== Early career ===
In the mid-1980s, Roney was an original member of the Philadelphia-based Hilltop Hustlers hip hop crew. His 1987 debut single, "Juice Crew Dis", which took aim at the New York-based hip hop crew run by influential rap producer Marley Marl (a group that included Kool G Rap and Big Daddy Kane), gained Roney a good amount of attention.A pair of 1988 singles for Hilltop and City Beat Records landed Roney a contract with Atlantic Records, where he released two full-length solo albums: his debut I Gotta Habit in 1989 and Life in the Ghetto in 1990. Both albums stayed on the Billboard 200 for numerous weeks.


=== C.E.B. ===
In 1991, Roney put his solo career aside to join hardcore hip hop group C.E.B. (which stood for "Countin' Endless Bank") with fellow Philadelphia rappers Warren McGlone (Steady B) and Ultimate Eaze. To disappointing sales and reviews, the trio released their only album, Countin' Endless Bank, on Ruffhouse Records in 1993. The single "Get the Point" reached number 5 on Billboard's Hot Rap Singles.In 1992, an independent label, Rags to Riches Records, released the single "Get the Point." After extraordinary success with the single, Rags to Riches Records founders, Malik Abd-hadi and Bilal "bilally b" Salaam signed the trio Cool C, Steady B and Ultimate Eaze (C.E.B.) to Ruffhouse Records. At that point, Abd-hadi and Salaam became their managers. The project was short-lived mainly because Ultimate Eaze had legal troubles and never showed up for a promotional tour to promote the release of the first album on Ruffhouse. The group was dropped before Steady B, and Cool C got back off tour.


== Murder conviction ==

On January 2, 1996, during the same time period that he was recording a comeback EP, Roney, along with C.E.B. bandmate McGlone (a.k.a. Steady B), and another local Philadelphia rapper, Mark Canty, attempted a bank robbery at a PNC bank branch in Feltonville. During the botched heist, Roney shot and killed Philadelphia Police officer Lauretha Vaird, who responded to the bank's silent alarm. As he exited the bank, Roney exchanged fire with another police officer, before he and Canty dropped their weapons at the scene and fled in a stolen minivan driven by McGlone.Roney was arrested on October 30, 1996, and convicted of first-degree murder. At his subsequent sentencing hearing, Roney was sentenced to death by lethal injection. On January 10, 2006, his death warrant was signed by Pennsylvania Governor Ed Rendell, and his execution date was set for March 9, 2006. He was granted a stay of execution from Pennsylvania Judge Gary Glazer on February 1, 2006, until all post-conviction litigation is resolved. His execution was set for January 8, 2015, but Roney was once again granted a stay of execution from Pennsylvania Judge L. Felipe Restrepo on December 5, 2014.Roney has maintained his innocence throughout the trial and appeals process, despite the testimony of three eyewitnesses who placed him at the scene of the robbery, as well as ballistic and forensic evidence and surveillance video that linked him to the murder. He is currently an inmate at the State Correctional Institution – Phoenix. His inmate ID number is DF1973.


== Religion ==
In prison, Cool C converted and accepted Islam as his religion. The exact period he converted is not clear.


== Discography ==


=== Solo albums ===


=== Group album ===


=== Singles ===


== References ==


== External links ==
AllMusic.com Biography – Cool C
ThugLifeArmy.com article about Cool C's trial & sentencingCordae Amari Dunston (born August 26, 1997), known mononymously as Cordae (formerly YBN Cordae and Entendre), is an American rapper, singer, and songwriter. He gained popularity by releasing remixes of popular songs, such as "My Name Is" by Eminem, and "Old Niggas", which was a response to the song "1985" by J. Cole. Videos to both remixes were uploaded to WorldStarHipHop's YouTube channel, which led to a positive response from both mainstream media and the online rap community.His debut studio album, The Lost Boy, was released in 2019 to wide acclaim; it received two nominations for Best Rap Album and Best Rap Song for the single "Bad Idea" at the 62nd Grammy Awards. Cordae was a member of the YBN collective from 2018 until he left the group in 2020 and dropped the "YBN" from his stage name.


== Early life ==
Cordae was born in North Carolina, then moved to Suitland, Maryland, where he was mostly raised. As a young child, he took an interest in music after his father played classic hip hop artists such as Rakim, Nas, Big L, and Talib Kweli. He began writing raps around the age of fifteen. As he got older, he would do research on artists through YouTube, attempting to find music like his father played. As Dunston grew older, he became more interested in pursuing a rap career. He prioritized his studies, but often became distracted by writing lyrics. He released three mixtapes as a teenager: "Entendre" – Anxiety (2014), I'm So Anxious (2016), and I'm So Anonymous (2017). He graduated from high school in 2015 and decided to go to college at Towson University. He dropped out in 2018, explaining that college was "bigger than him" as a first-generation student, and he was mainly doing it for his mother. He moved to Los Angeles shortly afterward.


== Career ==


=== 2018–2019: Early beginnings, record deal, and The Lost Boy ===
Cordae began taking his rap career seriously in early 2018. When visiting Los Angeles, he hung around YBN Nahmir and YBN Almighty Jay , whom he'd met through social media. Nahmir had reached out to Cordae after hearing a song Dunston made with his brother Simba. Dunston is the only member of YBN who hadn't been introduced through video games. He said he already felt like a part of YBN, and so changed from "Entendre" to "YBN Cordae". He also said that Entendre had been a name that he'd wanted to change for while: "I was just always around Nahmir and shit, those were just like my brothers... And, I was thinking, yo, I need to change my shit to like, Cordae, and shit, my actual first name. I was already "YBN" without the social tag".In May 2018, Cordae released his first single, which he called his "introduction to the world": a remix of the 1999 song "My Name Is" by Eminem. He released the song along with a music video via WorldStarHipHop on YouTube. He then released "Old Niggas" as a response to "1985" by J. Cole, followed by the tracks "Fighting Temptations" and "Kung Fu".Cordae made his debut live performance at the annual Rolling Loud music festival in May 2018, where he performed with YBN Nahmir and YBN Almighty Jay. He performed with the duo again for the 2018 XXL Freshman Show in New York City, after Nahmir was announced as an inductee of the yearly freshman class. Dunston was then announced to be joining Juice Wrld on his North American WRLD Domination tour from May to September 2018, along with Lil Mosey and Blake, ended up reaching 28 cities. Soon after, it was announced that the YBN collective would make a month-long tour in Europe. Dunston said he would release singles until his debut project was complete. On August 2, 2018, Nahmir and Cordae released a video for their single "Pain Away". On August 12, YBN Nahmir announced that an official YBN Mixtape featuring the trio would be released September 7, 2018. Cordae released the music video for his single, "Scotty Pippen", on August 23, 2018.On January 28, 2019, Cordae released a music video for a new song, "Locationships", on his YouTube channel. In March, he released "Have Mercy", the lead single from his debut studio album, The Lost Boy. He was named as one of the members of XXL's "2019 Freshman Class" on June 20. Cordae released "Bad Idea" and "RNP" as the second and third singles from the album, and finally the album itself on July 26, 2019. The album landed YBN Cordae two nominations at the 62nd Grammy Awards: Best Rap Album and Best Rap Song for the single "Bad Idea". In November, YBN Cordae announced that he would be headlining "The Lost Boy in America Tour", which began in January 2020.


=== 2020–present: Disbanding of YBN, and From a Birds Eye View ===
On August 6, 2020, YBN Nahmir announced on Twitter that the YBN collective had disbanded after a period of tension during which he and Cordae had stopped communicating. Cordae subsequently dropped the YBN from his stage name and asked YBN Nahmir for his blessing of the name change. On August 27, Cordae released a new single, "Gifted", featuring Roddy Ricch.On April 22, 2021, Cordae released the EP Just Until... - featuring Q-Tip and Young Thug, in anticipation of his second studio album. On October 7, 2021, he released the single "Super".Cordae released his second studio album, From a Birds Eye View, on January 14, 2022. The 14-song album features Eminem, Stevie Wonder, Gunna, and others.Cordae is featured by NF in the song "Careful" which is the third song of the album Hope released on April 7, 2023. This song reached the Billboard Hot 100 for a week and landed on position 85.


== Musical style and influences ==
Cordae lists Nas, Jay-Z, Kid Cudi, Kanye West, Eminem, Capital Steez, Lil Wayne, J. Cole, Big L, Travis Scott, and Kendrick Lamar as some of his biggest influences. Shortly after the release of The Lost Boy, he said his five favorite rappers were Jay-Z, Nas, 2Pac, The Notorious B.I.G., and Big L. He has called Nas' album It Was Written a big influence. He has repeatedly said that, given his musical background and understanding of old school hip-hop and what hip-hop is evolving into, he can be the key in bridging the generational gap in hip-hop.Respect Magazine opined in 2018 that Dunston was ahead of his time as a rapper. "He is a mix of the old and new school, and the deliverance and perception of his music sets himself apart from the new generation of rappers these days. We get a clear glimpse of this in his music videos for "Old N*ggas," 'My Name Is,' and 'Kung Fu,' which all have over 5 million views on YouTube. He is building a solid buzz for himself day by day, and letting the world know his bars and rhymes are ahead of his time. He has yet to drop a project proving such."Revolt TV said in 2018, "There's always going to be artists who go against the grain and manage to generate conversation without being mundane or routine.  Cordae is the result of perfect timing, a need for change and managing to bridge the gap between aesthetic and talent. He's the Gohan of the YBN collective, appearing docile and juvenile but displaying a 'mastery' over words that seems at odds with old-school "hip-hoppers" belief about his age group. It is yet to be seen if his talent warrants the praise he's receiving."


== Personal life ==
Before leaving college, Cordae worked at a local T.G.I. Friday's in Maryland. He told Adam22 of No Jumper that he "hated" it and that he always knew he was destined for more.Cordae participated in a Black Lives Matter protest in 2016, rapping among the crowd about the struggles he faced, and the issues he'd been noticing in his community. In July 2020, Dunston was arrested at a Breonna Taylor protest in Louisville, Kentucky, along with American professional football player Kenny Stills. He wore a defund the police t-shirt while watching the 2020 US Open women's singles final.
He began dating tennis star Naomi Osaka in 2019, whom he met at a Los Angeles Clippers game. On January 11, 2023, they announced that they are expecting their first child.On July 7, 2023, they welcomed their first child, a girl. On July 11, 2023, Cordae revealed the baby’s name, Shai, at a concert.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===


=== Extended plays ===


=== Mixtapes ===


=== Singles ===


==== As lead artist ====


==== As featured artist ====


=== Other charted songs ===


=== Guest appearances ===


== Notes ==


== References ==Stephen Goss (born March 15, 1992), known professionally as Cousin Stizz, is an American rapper and songwriter. He is from Dorchester, Massachusetts and signed to RCA Records.


== Early life ==
Stephen Goss was born on March 15, 1992, in Boston, Massachusetts. He grew up in the Boston, Massachusetts neighborhood of Dorchester. A childhood friend gave him the nickname "Cousin Stizz" when he was 12. After a close friend was shot to death, he began to behave recklessly. He attended Reading Memorial High School, graduating in 2010.


== Career ==
In his late teens, he began freestyling with friends in a local cypher series and released music as part of the group Pilot Nation later that year. A boost to his drive to turn rapping into a full-time career came in 2013 with the early success of friend and fellow Boston rapper Michael Christmas. In 2014 after months of recording, Stizz released his first official single as a solo artist, "Shoutout."His debut mixtape as a solo artist, Suffolk County, released June 1, 2015, received over 12 million listens on SoundCloud. Wide notice also came with the release on the internet of a video of Drake playing Stizz's single "Shoutout" at the star's birthday party. His next mixtape, MONDA, released in the summer of 2016, was named one of DigBoston's Best Local Albums of 2016.He signed a record deal with RCA Records in late 2016, and his third release and first on RCA, One Night Only, came out on July 12, 2017. It includes features from Offset (of Migos), G-Eazy, Big Leano, and Buddy, and production credits from Tee-WaTT, Tedd Boyd, Vinylz, FrancisGotHeat, Smash David, WondaGurl, and Dave Sava6e. Three weeks after the album's release, the single "Headlock" (feat. Offset) had been streamed over 11.3 million times on Spotify, reaching No. 12 on Billboard's Next Big Sound chart, while viewers on YouTube had watched Stizz's videos (combined) over 8 million times. Author Shea Serrano of The Ringer is an active fan of the rapper and also his No. 1 fan in the entire world, calling his music inspiring.In December 2018, he was crowned "Artist of the Year" at the Boston Music Awards. With his victory, Stizz became the first hip-hop musician to receive the awards ceremony's highest honor.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===


=== Mixtapes ===


=== Extended plays ===


== References ==


== External links ==
Cousin Stizz's Soundcloud
Official websiteRobert Keith Wiggins (20 September 1960 – 8 September 1989), known by his stage names Keef Cowboy and Cowboy was an American hip hop recording artist and a member of Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five. He is widely credited as having invented the term "hip hop".


== Life and career ==
Wiggins was first recruited to MC for his friend Grandmaster Flash (then DJ Flash) by 1977. He was a dancer and hype man for the band, and was a pioneer in the use of the call and response style to communicate with the audience. In 1983 he left the group and joined Melle Mel, with whom he recorded the single "White Lines (Don't Don't Do It)", followed by the album Grandmaster Melle Mel and the Furious Five in 1985.
He has been credited with coining the term "hip hop" in 1978 while teasing a friend who had just joined the United States Army. He did so by scat singing the made-up words "hip/hop/hip/hop" in a way that mimicked the rhythmic cadence of marching soldiers. Cowboy later worked the "hip hop" cadence into his stage performance.He was addicted to cocaine in the last two years of his life and died of a drug overdose in 1989.He is mentioned in the 1998 song “In Memory Of…” by Gang Starr, which references multiple hip hop figures who have died.


== Album discography ==
Partially based on:
Grandmaster Flash & the Furious Five – The Message (1982)
Grandmaster Flash & the Furious Five – Greatest Messages (1983)
Grandmaster Melle Mel & the Furious Five – Grandmaster Melle Mel and the Furious Five (1985)
Grandmaster Flash & the Furious Five – On the Strength (1988)


== References ==


== External links ==
Keith Wiggins discography at DiscogsJason Cole Critchlow (born February 25, 1998), known professionally as Jay Critch, is an Haitian-American rapper, singer and songwriter. He was formerly signed with Rich Forever Music.


== Early life ==
Jason Cole Critchlow grew up in the Clinton Hill neighborhood of Brooklyn, New York. He was born on February 25, 1998, to a Trinidadian mother. As a child, he was fascinated by listening to his older brother rap. Critch grew up listening to Fabolous, Lil Wayne, and Jay-Z, as well as many rappers from New York City.


== Career ==
Jay Critch's first major collaboration was with Rowdy Rebel on the song "Man Down" in 2015. In 2016, he began uploading songs on SoundCloud. He became the subject of widespread attention in 2016, when his song "Did It Again" was remixed by Rich the Kid, who signed him to Rich Forever Music in November. Their collaboration went viral, with the music video gaining over a million views in the first week of its release.In November 2018, as a newly signed artist, Jay Critch released his debut solo mixtape, Hood Favorite. It features guest appearances from Offset, French Montana and Fabolous. He also was featured on Lil Tjay's "Ruthless", which was certified platinum.
In December 2020, Jay Critch released his third mixtape, Signed with Love.On May 5, 2021, Jay returned with his mixtape, Critch Tape. Announced just hours before its release, the project contains 23 songs, with features from Fivio Foreign, Lil Tjay, and Drakeo the Ruler, among others.


== Discography ==


=== Mixtapes ===


=== Singles ===
Man Down (with Rowdy Rebel) (2016)
Scoop (2016)
Take Sumn (2016)
Hennything (2016)
FIFA (featuring Dami) (2016)
Affiliated (2016)
Talk About (with Rich the Kid) (2017)
Still Sippin (with Rich the Kid) (2017)
Did it Again (with Rich the Kid) (2017)
Rich Forever Intro (with Rich the Kid and Famous Dex) (2017)
Pull Up (with Famous Dex) (2017)
Started It (featuring Don Q) (2017)
Do the Math (with Rich the Kid) (2017)
Pretty as f*ck (with Splash Gordan and Zeus Blanco) (2017)
In & Out (2017)
Family Rich (featuring SkinnyFromThe9) (2017)
Speak Up (2017)
Bottom Line (2017)
HIT (with Desiigner) (2017)
Red and Blue (with Vendetta) (2017)
Get Bucks (2017)
Yoshi (2017)
Rockets (2017)
Driving me Brazy (2017)
Adlibs (2017)
Wassup wit the Bag (featuring Larssen and Ski Mask the Slump God) (2017)
Fashion (with Rich the Kid) (2017)
Thousand Ways (with Harry Fraud) (2017)
Make it Count (with Lil Dude) (2018)
Ego (2018)
Big 30 (2018)
Sweepstakes (2018)
Gotta Go (Remix) (featuring A-D and Kalem) (2018)
Bluff (2018)
Still Sippin (Remix) (with Rich the Kid featuring Prince Don) (2018)
Now a Days (with King Ceazar) (2018)
Change Clothes (with Bronx Twins) (2018)
Robin Hood (2018)
Knots (featuring wifisfuneral) (2018)
Wanna Ball (featuring Flipp Dinero) (2018)
Nervous (featuring Rich the Kid, Famous Dex and Lil Baby) (2018)
Ice (featuring Marty Baller, ASAP Ferg, Rich the Kid and Sfera Ebbasta) (2018)
Cable Guy (featuring Key and Kenny Beats) (2018)
Oh Wow (with Rich the Kid) (2018)
Brown Hair (2019)
Stimulate (featuring Buckee) (2019)
Ruthless (featuring Lil Tjay) (2019)
Count me Up (with TMK) (2019)
Messy (2019)
Wendy's (2019)
6ix Rings (2019)
One 2 (with Pi'erre Bourne) (2019)
Don't @ Me (2019)
Adlibs Part 2 (2019)
Something Special (2019)
Necklace (with AJ Tracey) (2019)
Bully (2019)
Party Bus (with Rich the Kid and Famous Dex) (2019)
I'm a Star (Madden NFL 20) (2019)
Cameras (featuring Nick Mira & JetsonMade) (2019)
Dreams in a Wraith (2019)
Spooky (2020)
Money Talk (with Tony Seltzer and A Lau) (2020)
Handlin' Business (featuring WoBandz) (2020)
Bronny (2020)
Mighty Ducks (2020)
GameStop (2020)
Outside (with Slayter) (2020)
Hoes Fav (with Laron) (2020)
Devastated (with Laron) (2020)
Execute (with Tank God) (2020)
Back End (with Laron) (2020)
Living Good (with Laron) (2020)
Go Wherever (2021)
PC (2021)
To the Sky (2021)
Built for this (2021)
Hustler Muzik (2021)
Stretch (2021)
Jack It (2021)
Headlines (2021)
Gifted (2021)
Deadline (2021)
Losses (with Slayter) (2021)
Talk (2021)
KD Freestyle (2022)
Buck 50 Freestyle (2022)
Drank in my Cup (2022)
At my worst (2022)
Spin no blocks (2022)
Stamped (2022)
Anyday (2022)
Sade (2022)
Close to me / Active (2022)
Up All Night (2022)
Cheating Freestyle (2022)
Spooky Freestyle (2022)
Click (2022)
Born with it (with Harry Fraud) (2022)
Lefty (with Rich the Kid) (2022)
Where's Dexter (with Rich the Kid and Famous Dex) (2023)
Oh What a feeling (2023)
Still Movin (with Rich the Kid and Fivio Foreign) (2023)


== References ==Felix Delgado (born December 18, 1974), better known by his stage name Cuban Link, is a Cuban American rapper and original member of Terror Squad.


== Biography ==
Delgado was born in Havana, Cuba, in 1974. He and his family emigrated to the United States in 1980 during the Mariel boatlift, settling in the South Bronx in New York City. When Delgado was growing up, hip hop music was rising in popularity in his neighborhood. Delgado took on stage name Cuban Link and associated with fellow rappers Big Pun and Triple Seis in a group under the name Full-A-Clips.After Fat Joe signed to Atlantic Records and launched Terror Squad Productions in 1997, he signed Big Pun, which lead to Cuban Link's affiliation with Terror Squad. Cuban Link and Big Pun both made guest performances on The Beatnuts' single "Off the Books" in 1997 and they joined Fat Joe's Terror Squad by 1998. Cuban Link contributed guest appearance vocals to Big Pun's April 1998 debut album, Capital Punishment, on the song "Glamour Life". Following this appearance, Cuban Link was signed to Atlantic and Terror Squad and contributed guest appearance vocals to Fat Joe's September 1998 album Don Cartagena on the songs "Bet Ya Man Can't (Triz)", "The Hidden Hand", and "Terror Squadians". Link performed on the track "Tell Me What You Want" from Terror Squad's debut album, "The Album". After signing to Atlantic and Terror Squad, Cuban Link began recording his debut LP 24K. Big Pun died on February 7, 2000, so Cuban Link wrote and released "Flowers For The Dead" in Pun's honor. The album was scheduled to be released in the summer of 2000, however, without Pun's mediation, contract disputes between Fat Joe and Cuban Link and leaks prevented the release of 24K. 24K is now available for digital download on Amazon Music, but has not been released physically. 
In April 2001, during an album release party for Angie Martinez at Jimmy's Bronx Cafe, Cuban Link got in an altercation and had his face slashed when he was trying to break up a fight between Fat Joe and rapper Sunkiss. By that time, Cuban Link left Terror Squad. He released a mixtape, Broken Chains, in 2003 put together by Dren Starr & Roy P. Perez. He joined independent label Men of Business in 2005 and released Chain Reaction. It included singles "Sugar Daddy" (featuring Mýa) and "Scandalous" (featuring Don Omar) and combined some reggaeton sound as well.
It was the largest independent deal ($2MM) for a single album and an unsigned act, at the time and a joint venture with Universal.


== Discography ==

Studio albums24K (2000) (Unreleased)
Chain Reaction (2005)Collaboration albumsTerror Squad: The Album with Terror Squad (1999)


== References ==


== External links ==
Official InstagramDerrick T. Jones (born June 19, 1970), better known by his stage name D-Nice, is an American DJ, record producer, and rapper who began his career in the mid-1980s with the hip hop group Boogie Down Productions. He discovered Kid Rock in 1988, landing him a deal with Jive Records.


== Life and career ==
Jones was born and raised in the Harlem neighborhood of Manhattan, New York City. He later moved to The Bronx as a teenager. At age 15, it was there that he met Scott La Rock and later formed Boogie Down Productions along with KRS-One in 1986. In his early career with the group, he was given the nicknames as "the Human TR-808" and "the 808". D-Nice also gained significant popularity when he produced the song "Self-Destruction" for the Stop the Violence Movement.Soon after the song released, D-Nice signed a solo deal Jive Records and released his debut studio album called Call Me D-Nice in 1990. The album peaked at #75 on the Billboard Top Pop Albums and #12 on the Top Black Albums chart. It was also rated 3.5 out of 5 mics by The Source magazine. In 1991, D-Nice released his second studio album called To tha Rescue. The album peaked at #137 on the Top Pop Albums chart and #27 on the Top R&B Albums chart. He collaborated with KRS-One, Naughty by Nature, and Too Short for the album.D-Nice clashed with Jive Records over his stylistic direction and soon stopped releasing music as a recording artist. In 1996, his first daughter, Ashli Lyric Jones, was born. D-Nice became a web developer in the late 1990s and started his own creative services company in 2000.
He later had another daughter named Dylan Coleman-Jones with Kelli M. Coleman, Executive Vice President for GlobalHue.D-Nice began working as a photographer in the 2000s while also still being a DJ and shot the album covers for Carl Thomas' 2007 album So Much Better and Pharoahe Monch's 2011 album W.A.R. (We Are Renegades). He also photographed the album cover for Kenny Lattimore's 2017 album, Vulnerable.
In August 2008, he married actress Malinda Williams, but the couple separated in October 2009. In February 2010, the couple filed for divorce and the divorce was finalized on June 14, 2010.
In March 2020, D-Nice began hosting Homeschool at Club Quarantine on Instagram Live from his home as a way for people to come together and help others cope with the COVID-19 global health crisis. The 3/21 Saturday night dance party ran 9 hours and D-Nice urged people to "take care of one another and wash their hands." It drew over 100,000 viewers, including Rihanna, Lenny Kravitz, Nile Rodgers, Lalah Hathaway, Bernie Sanders, Joe Biden, Dwyane Wade, Janet Jackson, Fab Five Freddy, Michelle Obama, Mark Zuckerberg, Donnie Wahlberg, Angela Bassett, and Sheila E., among others.  The following day, March 22, his stream capped at over 150,000 simultaneous viewers. D-Nice won the 2020 Webby Award for Artist of the Year in the category Special Achievement. He also was one of the Honoree Recipients for the Shine a Light Award during the 2020 BET Awards for his contributions of Club Quarantine, alongside co-recipients with Verzuz creators Timbaland and Swizz Beatz.
On March 27, 2021, he was awarded Entertainer of the Year at the 52nd NAACP Image Awards. On June 22, 2021, he was awarded the ASCAP Voice of the Culture Award for being a beacon of hope and source of inspiration during the COVID-19 pandemic. His livestreamed DJ sets remain a popular online destination for thousands weekly, and he has more than 2.6 million followers on Instagram.


== Discography ==


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website 
AllMusicGlenn K. Bolton, widely known as Daddy-O, is an American rapper and record producer. He began his career by founding the hip-hop group Stetsasonic. He is known as an early advocate of sampling in music.


== Career ==
In 1981, Daddy-O began his career as the lead member of the band Stetsasonic, which included Prince Paul, in Brooklyn, New York. He produced and remixed songs for musical acts such as Mary J. Blige, Queen Latifah, Red Hot Chili Peppers, The B-52's, Jeffrey Osborne, Chante Moore, and Lil' Kim.From 1994 to 1998, he was a Senior Director for MCA Records. After leaving MCA, he worked for Motown Records and various other entertainment agencies, where he helped to produce and discover talent. Other acts with which he has been associated include Sonic Youth, Sublime, Barry White, They Might Be Giants, Camron, Pizzicato 5, and Third World.In 2015, Daddy-O joined the CloudSpray team as a management and marketing consultant. In 2016, Daddy-O and his partner Lion Lindwedel (founder of True School Entertainment) formed their co-owned label, Odad Truth Records. He released his solo albums on the OTR Label with digital distribution on Chuck D's distribution company SpitDigital.  The first release was #EverybodyButKRS, followed in February 2016 with The Odad, the Gun, & the Children, El Dolor De Las Calles, No Tablecloths in 2018, From My Hood 2 U in 2019, and the most recent solo release of G.O.A.T. Antidote in 2020.


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===


=== Stetsasonic (As Daddy-O) ===
On Fire (1986)
In Full Gear (1988)
Blood, Sweat & No Tears (1991)
People In The Neighborhood EP/ Chopped Herring Records (1991)
Here We Go Again (2021)


=== Professor Daddy-O ===
You Can Be a Daddy, But Never Daddy-O (1993)
#EverybodyButKRS (2015)
The Odad, The Gun, & The Children (2016)
El Dolor de las Calles (2016)
No Tablecloths (2018)
From My Hood 2 U (2019)
G.O.A.T. Antidote (2020)


=== Singles ===


=== Stetsasonic (As Daddy-O) ===
"Just Say Stet" (1985)
"Go Stetsa 1" (1986)
"Faye/Forever My Beat" (1986)
"A.F.R.I.C.A. (1986)
"Sally" (1988)
"Talkin' All That Jazz" (1988)
"No B.S. Allowed" (1991)
"(Now Ya'll Givin' Up) Love" (2020)


=== Professor Daddy-O ===
"Flowin' in File" (1993)
"Brooklyn Bounce" (1993)
"Psychedelic Sally" (2015)
"MCee" (2015)
"Graffiti" (2015)
"Method of My Madness" (feat. Chuck D) (2015)
"Blood Got Shot (Now The Blues Got Me)" (2016)
"Trunkfullafunk" (2016)
"Bullets" (2016)
"Shootin Like A Beatbox" (feat. SG) (2018)
"Haiti" (feat. Marsha Bolton) (2018)
"A Letter to T.I." (2019)
"From My Hood 2 U" (feat. Posdnous of De La Soul) (2019)
"Be YrSELF" (Maxi-Single) (2020)
"Odad Truth" (feat. DJ King Shameek) (2020)
"Crooklyn Dodgers 4 (feat. Thirstin Howl III, Indigo Phoenyx) (2020)


=== Credits ===
On Fire - Stetsasonic / Tommy Boy Records (1986) Writer, Producer, Vocals
A.F.R.I.C.A./Free South Africa - Stetsasonic/Tackhead / Tommy Boy Records(1987) Writer/Vocals
I Cram to Understand U (Sam)/Take It Lyte - MC Lyte / First Priority Records(1987) Mixing
Top Billin' (Remix)/The Freshest Slowest Jam - Audio Two / First Priority Records(1987) Producer
Coolin' in Cali - The 7A3 / Geffen Records (1988) Producer, Editing, Composer
Float On/Showtime - Stetsasonic / Tommy Boy (1988) Remixer, Mixing, Vocals
In Full Gear - Stetsasonic / Tommy Boy (1988) Producer, Mixing, Writer, Percussion, Vocals
Rhyme Syndicate Comin' Through - Various Artists / Warner Records (1988) Producer
Sally/DBC Let The Music Play - Stetsasonic / Tommy Boy Records (1988) Producer, Co-Producer, Writer, Vocals
Talkin' All That Jazz - Stetsasonic / Tommy Boy Records (1988) Additional Producer, Remixer, Producer, Writer, Vocals
FFRR - Silver on Black / FFRR Records (1989) Producer
All Hail The Queen - Queen Latifah / Tommy Boy Records (1989) Producer
I Ain't Making It - Stetsasonic / Warner Records (1989) Producer, Writer, Vocals
Journey - Jabulani / Giant Records (1992) Producer
Love's Taken Over (Remix) - Chante Moore / MCA Records (1992) Producer
Third World: Reggae Ambassadors - Third World / Island Records (1994) Producer
Forbidden Love - Third World / Island Records(1994) Producer
II - Boyz II Men / Motown (1994) Writer
All Hail The Queen - Queen Latifah / Tommy Boy Records (1989) Producer, Mixing
Istanbul (Not Constantinople) - They Might Be Giants / Elektra (1990) Remixer
Justifier / Taste - Big Pig / White Label Records (1990) Producer
Nubian M.O.B. - Nubian M.O.B. / Cold Chillin' Records (1992) Producer
Real Love - Mary J. Blige / Uptown Records (1992) Remixer
You Can Be A Daddy, But Never Daddy-O - Professor Daddy-O / Island Records (1993) Producer, Co-Producer, Writer, Vocals
CB4 (motion picture soundtrack) - Various Artists / MCA (1993) Lyrics, Assistant Producer, Performer
Innercity Griots - Freestyle Fellowship / 4th & Broadway (1993) Producer, Vocal Arrangements, Engineer, Mixing
Third World: Reggae Ambassadors - Third World / Island Records (1994) Guest Performer
Talkin' All That Jazz (Remixes) - Stetsasonic / Tommy Boy Records (1998) Remixer, Writer, Vocals
Under The Covers: Essential Red Hot Chili Peppers - Red Hot Chili Peppers / EMI Records (1998) Remixer
Happy End of You (Remixes) - Pizzicato Five / Matador (1998) Remixer
Confessions of Fire - Cam'ron / Epic Records (1998) Producer
Shootin Like a Beatbox EP - Professor Daddy-O / SplitSLAM Record Label Group (2018) Producer, Writer, Vocals
From My Hood 2 U - Professor Daddy-O / The SpitSlam Record Label Group (2019) Executive Producer, Writer, Vocals
G.O.A.T. Antidote - Professor Daddy-O / The SpitSLAM Record Label Group (2020) Writer, Executive Producer, Vocals
Here We Go Again - Stetsasonic (2021) Writer, Producer, Vocals


=== Guest appearances ===
Self Destruction - The Stop The Violence Movement / Jive Records (1989)
I Ain't Making It - Stetsasonic / Warner Records (1989)
The Pros - Queen Latifah / Tommy Boy Records (1989)
Gotta Be A Better Way - Foster McElroy / Atlantic (1989)
Nubian M.O.B. - Nubian M.O.B. / Cold Chillin' Records (1992)
Freestyle Fellowship - "Inner City Boundaries" from Innercity Griots (1993)
Forbidden Love - Third World / Island Records(1994)
The Conjuring - Indigo Phoenyx x P.A.Dre (2020)
Loud Is Not Enough - Enemy Radio / The SpitSLAM Record Label Group (2020)
Drugz - Andre Nickatina / 75 Girls Records (2020)
What You Gonna Do When the Grid Goes Down? - Public Enemy / Def Jam Records (2020)


== References ==


== External links ==
Daddy-O at Instagram
Daddy-O at Facebook
Daddy-O discography at DiscogsBrian Joseph Burton (born July 29, 1977), known professionally as Danger Mouse, is an American musician and record producer. He came to prominence in 2004 when he released The Grey Album, which combined vocal performances from Jay-Z's The Black Album with instrumentals from the Beatles' The Beatles, also known as The White Album. In 2008, Esquire named him one of the "75 most influential people of the 21st century".
He formed Gnarls Barkley with CeeLo Green and produced its albums St. Elsewhere and The Odd Couple. In 2009, he collaborated with James Mercer of the indie rock band The Shins to form the band Broken Bells; the band released three albums since then, with Into the Blue (2022) being the most recent one. Burton collaborated with rapper MF Doom as Danger Doom on The Mouse and the Mask and with emcee Black Thought on Cheat Codes.
As a producer Danger Mouse produced the second Gorillaz album, 2005's Demon Days, as well as Beck's 2008 record Modern Guilt and four albums with The Black Keys (Attack & Release, Brothers, El Camino and Turn Blue). In 2016, Danger Mouse produced, performed on and co-wrote songs for the eleventh studio album by the Red Hot Chili Peppers titled The Getaway. Danger Mouse has also produced and co-written albums by Norah Jones (Little Broken Hearts), Electric Guest (Mondo), Portugal. The Man (Evil Friends), Adele (25), and ASAP Rocky (At.Long.Last.ASAP). He has been nominated for 22 Grammy Awards and has won six. Danger Mouse has been nominated in the Producer of the Year category five times, and won the award in 2011.


== Early life and music career beginnings ==
Brian Joseph Burton was born on July 29, 1977 in White Plains, New York. He spent much of his childhood in Spring Valley, New York. Burton moved to Stone Mountain, Georgia, a suburb of Atlanta, where he attended and graduated from Redan High School. He lived in Athens, Georgia, where he pursued a degree in telecommunications at the University of Georgia on scholarship, and where his trip hop works (The Chilling Effect (1999), Rhode Island (2000), and Pelican City / Scanner - Pelican City vs. Scanner (2002)) were released while he was a student. While at the University of Georgia he was introduced to Nirvana, Pink Floyd, and Portishead, and came to know the indie rock scene in Athens, remixed work by several local artists, including Neutral Milk Hotel, and DJ'd for University of Georgia radio station WUOG-FM. From 1998 to 2003, Burton created a series of remix CDs and records under the stage name Danger Mouse. He performed in a mouse outfit because he was too shy to show his face, and took his name from the English cartoon series Danger Mouse.


== Music career ==
While in Athens, Burton took second place in a 1998 talent contest and was asked to open for a concert at the University of Georgia featuring OutKast and Goodie Mob. Afterwards, Burton claims he approached CeeLo Green, a member of Goodie Mob, and gave him an instrumental demo tape. CeeLo has no recollection of this and the instrumental demo tape's existence has never been confirmed. Trey Reames who had promoted CeeLo's first solo shows in Georgia, moved to London and became Burton's first manager. He suggested and negotiated CeeLo's appearance on the 26' Remix of the Danger Mouse and Jemini record. When Burton met CeeLo for this project, he shared some beats which led them to collaborate as Gnarls Barkley.


=== 2001–2004 ===
Burton moved to Britain for a couple of years, living in New Cross in London and working at the Rose pub  near London Bridge. While there, he sent a demo to Lex Records, which signed him. Burton relocated to Los Angeles; his first original releases under the name Danger Mouse were his collaborations with rapper Jemini, including the album Ghetto Pop Life, released in 2003 on Lex Records. The Danger Mouse debut was well received by critics, but he did not rise to fame until he created The Grey Album, mixing a cappella versions of Jay-Z's The Black Album over beats crafted from samples of the Beatles' eponymous album, also known as The White Album. The remix album, originally created just for his friends, spread over the Internet and became very popular with both the general audience and critics, with Rolling Stone calling it the ultimate remix record and Entertainment Weekly ranking it the best record of that year. He discussed his feelings about any controversy the album may have created in the documentary Alternative Freedom. Danger Mouse was named among the Men of the Year by GQ in 2004 and won a 2005 Wired Rave Award.


=== 2004–2007 ===
The Grey Album got the attention of Damon Albarn, who enlisted Danger Mouse to produce Gorillaz' second studio album, Demon Days. Demon Days earned Burton a Grammy Award nomination for Producer of the Year.
Danger Mouse's next project was The Mouse and the Mask, a collaboration with MF Doom (as Danger Doom) about and for Cartoon Network's Adult Swim. The two had previously collaborated on the Danger Mouse remix of Zero 7's "Somersault", on the Prince Po track "Social Distortion", and on Gorillaz' "November Has Come". A year later, Danger Doom released a follow-up EP called Occult Hymn. The 7-track EP featured new songs as well as remixes of tracks from The Mouse & The Mask and was released as a free download on Adult Swim's site.
In 2006, Danger Mouse and CeeLo as Gnarls Barkley released their first album, St. Elsewhere, which included the international hit single "Crazy". "Crazy" became the first UK number-one single based solely on downloads. Gnarls Barkley set out on tour and was one of the main opening acts on the Red Hot Chili Peppers' Stadium Arcadium World Tour. The Gnarls Barkley touring lineup featured future Chili Peppers guitarist, Josh Klinghoffer. He produced two tracks on The Rapture's 2006 album Pieces of the People We Love. In the autumn of 2006, Sparklehorse released his fourth album, Dreamt for Light Years in the Belly of a Mountain, a collaboration with Danger Mouse and Steven Drozd of The Flaming Lips. In August and September 2006, Danger Mouse collaborated with British graffiti artist Banksy to replace 500 copies of Paris Hilton's album Paris in British music stores with altered album artwork and a 40-minute instrumental song containing various statements she had made.


=== 2007–present ===
In January 2007, Danger Mouse produced another collaboration with Damon Albarn on The Good, the Bad & the Queen, along with The Clash bassist Paul Simonon, former The Verve guitarist Simon Tong and afrobeat pioneer and Africa 70 drummer Tony Allen.
In March 2008, The Odd Couple, the second album of his and CeeLo Green's Gnarls Barkley project, was released. In May 2008, an album with Martina Topley-Bird, titled The Blue God, was released. Martina collaborated on "All Alone", one song on the Danger Mouse produced Gorillaz second LP, Demon Days. Also released in May 2008 was Replica Sun Machine, an album with the band The Shortwave Set, including a collaboration with Van Dyke Parks and the Velvet Underground's John Cale, according to British music magazine New Musical Express.
Upcoming releases include a follow-up to Ghetto Pop Life entitled Kill Your Heroes. It was scheduled to be released in summer of 2006, but its release was pushed back to an undetermined date. He was also working on an album with The Black Keys and Ike Turner. Turner's death was expected to cancel the album, but The Black Keys and Danger Mouse released Attack & Release in April 2008. Some songs must have been recorded by Turner, however, as a posthumous Danger Mouse produced album has been mentioned, as well as another collaboration with MF Doom.Danger Mouse produced and crafted beat structures with Beck for Beck's album Modern Guilt, which was released in July 2008. In April 2009, he and Helena Costas released an album as Joker's Daughter titled The Last Laugh. Danger Mouse was also listed as one of Esquire's 75 most influential people of the 21st century.
Since 2005, Danger Mouse (as a producer as well as an artist with Gnarls Barkley) has been nominated for 12 Grammy Awards: Producer of the Year (2005, 2006 and 2008), Record of Year (2006), Album of Year (2006), Best Alternative Album (2006 and 2008), Best Urban Alternative Performance (2006), Best Short Form Music Video (2007 and 2008) and Best Pop Performance (2008). He won two Grammy Awards in 2006 for Best Alternative Album and Best Urban Alternative Performance. He won in 2017 for his work as a producer on Adele's 25.Danger Mouse and Sparklehorse were due to release an album in the summer of 2009 entitled Danger Mouse and Sparklehorse Present: Dark Night of the Soul (together with a 100+ photo book with photographs by David Lynch). Due to a dispute with EMI the album was not released officially until July 12, 2010. However, the BBC reported that Danger Mouse planned to release a full illustrated jewel case with a blank CD-R included in it. The CD-R was to be labeled: "For Legal Reasons, enclosed CD-R contains no music. Use it as you will."On November 8, 2009, Paste magazine named Danger Mouse the "Best Producer of the Decade (2000–2009)."Together with James Mercer, Danger Mouse (billed by his real name, Brian Burton) formed Broken Bells. The project was first announced on September 29, 2009. On December 21, 2009, the band informed fans in an e-mail message of the release of their debut single "The High Road", which was made available as a free download on their official site. The self-titled debut album was released in the U.S. on March 9, 2010.
In 2010, Danger Mouse began producing U2's thirteenth studio album Songs of Innocence, released in 2014. U2's frontman, Bono, said in 2010, "We have about 12 songs with him. At the moment that looks like the album we will put out next because it's just happening so easily." Ultimately, Danger Mouse was credited as co-producer on 7 of the album's 11 tracks, and sole producer on "Sleep Like a Baby Tonight" and "This Is Where You Can Reach Me Now". During this period, he also produced the band's single "Ordinary Love", released in 2013 as part of the soundtrack to Mandela: Long Walk to Freedom, as well as their single "Invisible", which was released on Super Bowl Sunday, February 2, 2014.
In 2005, Danger Mouse began composing a "Spaghetti Western" album with composer Daniele Luppi as well as Jack White and Norah Jones performing the main vocals on the album. Instrumentation was done mainly by musicians who played on the original Ennio Morricone scores. Danger Mouse does not play any instruments on the album. The style of the album reflects much of Danger Mouse's work since 2005, such as segments of Beck's Modern Guilt, aspects of Dark Night of the Soul, and songs like "Mongrel Heart" off of the self-titled Broken Bells album. The album was titled Rome and was released on May 16, 2011.On February 13, 2011, Danger Mouse won a Grammy for Best Producer for his work on the Black Keys' Brothers, Broken Bells' self-titled album, and the Danger Mouse and Sparklehorse album Dark Night of the Soul.
On November 1, 2011, Los Angeles-based indie band Electric Guest released their first single, "Troubleman/American Daydream", produced by Danger Mouse. Danger Mouse produced the band's whole debut album Mondo which was released on April 24, 2012.
On May 1, 2012, Norah Jones released her Danger Mouse-produced fifth studio album Little Broken Hearts (Blue Note/EMI).Danger Mouse co-wrote the song "Keep It for Your Own" by POP ETC.Danger Mouse produced Portugal. The Man's seventh studio album, Evil Friends, released in June 2013.Danger Mouse produced At.Long.Last.ASAP, the 2015 album by rapper ASAP Rocky.
In November 2015 Danger Mouse launched his own record label, 30th Century Records.Danger Mouse was announced as the producer for the Red Hot Chili Peppers eleventh album and that he would replace Rick Rubin, the producer of the band's previous six albums dating back to 1991. Production began in February 2015. The production was halted due to an injury the band's bassist Flea suffered during a skiing trip. It resumed in August 2015 and continued into early 2016. The Getaway was released in June 2016 with Danger Mouse performing on and having co-writing credits on many of the songs.In March 2017, Red Hot Chili Peppers singer Anthony Kiedis indicated that the band would likely want to work again with Danger Mouse on the follow-up to The Getaway. Kiedis stated "I think it's good to work with the same guy again to um, you know you had your freshman experience. I think we owe it to ourselves to start from the beginning with this guy and see what we can accomplish." However, their follow-up albums, 2022's Unlimited Love and Return of the Dream Canteen, featured the return of longtime producer Rick Rubin.
In April 2017, he released Resistance Radio: The Man in The High Castle, a compilation produced alongside 30th Century Records-signee producer Sam Cohen. Connected to Amazon's eponymous TV series, this album contains covers of 1960s classics by contemporary artists like Beck, Norah Jones, Kelis, Andrew VanWyngarden, The Shins, and more.
In June 2017, Portugal. The Man released Woodstock, their follow-up to 2013's Evil Friends; both of which featured production from Danger Mouse.
In June 2017, he collaborated with Run the Jewels and Big Boi to create the song "Chase Me" for the 2017 film Baby Driver.In May 2018, he produced the acclaimed album Wide Awake! by Parquet Courts.
In March 2019, he collaborated with Karen O to create the album Lux Prima. The album has been met with generally favorable review by critics.On August 12 2022, he released a collaborative studio album Cheat Codes with The Roots emcee Black Thought.
In October 2022, he released a third Broken Bells album with James Mercer entitled Into The Blue (stylized all caps).


== Philosophy ==
In an interview for The New York Times magazine, Danger Mouse was compared to a film auteur, basing his music production philosophy on the cinematic philosophy of directors like Woody Allen. "Woody Allen was an auteur: he did his thing, and that particular thing was completely his own", he said. "That's what I decided to do with music. I want to create a director's role within music, which is what I tried to do on this album (St. Elsewhere)... I can create different kinds of musical worlds, but the artist needs the desire to go into that world... Musically, there is no one who has the career I want. That's why I have to use film directors as a model."


== Awards ==


=== Grammy Awards ===


=== Other awards ===
2004 Entertainment Weekly's Album of the Year (Danger Mouse – The Grey Album)
2004 GQ Magazine's "Men of the Year"
2005 Wired Magazine's Rave Award (Music)
2005 Q – Best Producer
2006 Entertainment Weekly's Album of the Year (Gnarls Barkley – St. Elsewhere)
2006 Q (Song of the Year – Gnarls Barkley's "Crazy")
2008 Rolling Stone – Best Producer in Rock
2009 Esquire – 75 Most Influential People of the 21st Century
2009 GQ Magazine's Album of the Year (Danger Mouse & Sparklehorse – Dark Night of the Soul)
2009 Paste – Producer of the Decade
2010 Rolling Stone – Song of the Decade (Gnarls Barkley – "Crazy")
2013 Music Producers Guild – International Producer of the Year
2014 71st Golden Globe Awards (winner) (Best Original Song – "Ordinary Love")
2016 74th Golden Globe Awards (nominee) (Best Original Song – "Gold")


== Discography ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
EFF: Grey Tuesday: A Quick Overview of the Legal Terrain
Cease and desist letter from EMI #1Daniel O'Connor (born December 12, 1968), better known as Danny Boy or Danny Boy O'Connor, is an American rapper, art director, and the executive director of The Outsiders House Museum. O'Connor spent his childhood in New York, before moving to Los Angeles in the 1980s. In the 1990s, O'Connor co-founded the rap group House of Pain, with fellow rapper Erik Schrody (Everlast) and DJ Leor Dimant (DJ Lethal). Based on their cultural heritage they fashioned themselves as rowdy Irish-American hooligans. O'Connor played the role of art director, designing logos, branding, hype man, and co-rapper. In 1992, with the singles "Jump Around" and "Shamrocks and Shenanigans", their self-titled debut album, also known as Fine Malt Lyrics, went platinum.
They followed it up with Same as It Ever Was (1994), which went gold, and Truth Crushed to Earth Shall Rise Again (1996), before they all went their separate ways. O'Connor took part in several music projects, and continued doing designs as freelance work. In 2006, O'Connor founded the rap group La Coka Nostra where he was joined by George Carroll (Slaine), William Braunstein (Ill Bill), Dimant, and Schrody (only for the first album). Together they have three releases: A Brand You Can Trust (2009),  Masters of the Dark Arts (2012) and To Thine Own Self Be True (2016).
In 2016, O'Connor, who is a lifelong fan of S. E. Hinton's book The Outsiders and its film adaptation by Francis Ford Coppola, bought the house used in the film located in Tulsa, Oklahoma. He turned it into a museum named The Outsiders House Museum, that contains much of the book and film memorabilia. For his effort preserving a cultural landmark he received a key to the city.


== Early life ==
O'Connor was born in Brooklyn, New York City, on December 12, 1968. His father was incarcerated when O’Connor was two months old. O’Connor and his mother moved to Los Angeles when he was six. When O’Connor was seventeen his father, a homeless alcoholic, was murdered by someone who poured gasoline on him to set him on fire. During that time O’Connor was in a gang involved in petty crimes, and he was placed on probation.


== Career ==


=== 1990–1992: Founding House of Pain and breakthrough ===
In 1990, O'Connor got together with fellow rapper Erik Schrody (Everlast) who had just released a rap album called Forever Everlasting (1990), that didn't have much success. O'Connor knew Schrody when he went to William Howard Taft High School in Woodland Hills, California (1984–1986), and various hip hop event they attended in their teens. Both of Irish descent, they decided to make a hip hop group with this identity. While hanging out at O'Connor's home, Schrody noticed a cassette with the title House of Pain, which was a demo of a Punk group O'Connor tried to put together. Schrody really liked the name and felt they should re-use as their name. Schrody brought in his former DJ Leor Diamant (DJ Lethal), who is actually of Latvian descent, and House of pain was created. While in House of Pain, O'Connor acted as the hype man, second emcee, art director and the graphic artist of the group. After they recorded a demo, for which O'Connor designed the cover, that created a bidding war among labels. The label they chose was Tommy Boy Records, who credits O'Connor's art work to have initially caught their attention.In 1992, they released their debut album House of Pain, subtitled Fine Malt Lyrics. Their first single "Jump Around" was a major hit. In the United States, it peaked at number 3 on the Billboard Hot 100, while reaching number 5 on the Hot Rap Songs, 13 on Rhythmic Top 40, 1 on Hot Dance Music/Maxi-Singles Sales, number 17 on the Billboard Dance Club Songs, and is certified platinum. O'Connor expressed regrets for not doing any writing on Jump Around, for the later royalties it could have provided him. Their second single "Shamrocks and Shenanigans (Boom Shalock Lock Boom)", it peaked at 65 on the Billboard Hot 100, 75 on the Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs, 14 on the Dance Club Songs, and 74 on Radio Songs. The album peaked at 14 on the Billboard 200, 14 on the U.S. Billboard Top Current Albums, 16 on the U.S. Billboard Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums, 14 on the U.S. Billboard Top Album Sales, and is certified platinum. Rolling Stone gave three point five stars, good plus, and noted "with a groovy swagger, this collection of hard-core hip-hop tracks offers many moments of technicolor snap and crackle, and also titled House of Pain". Q magazine wrote that it is a good album three stars and said "...their music is of the dense, hard-hitting school of hip hop...the group have absorbed black rap's musical lessons and create a satisfying platform for their above average deliveries..." The Source said it was a good plus, gave it three point five stars and concluded that it is "...a very solid and at times exceptional album...imagine if Licensed to Ill wasn't an upper middle class Jewish thing but rather a working class Irish thang...the atmosphere is like that of a cross between a frat party and a bar room brawl... NME gave it a six calling it good and noting "...contains some creative and accomplished rap music..." Rob Theakston of AllMusic gave it four stars.


=== 1993–1996: Subsequent success and group's breakup ===
In 1993, O'Connor with his group mates were among the rap artists who had cameo roles in Ted Demme's film Who's the Man?. For this project they provided a theme song by the same name, which was also used as a single for the soundtrack and their subsequent album. It rose to number 97 on the Billboard Hot 100, 77 on the Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Singles & Tracks, and 10 on the US Billboard Hot Dance Music/Maxi-Singles Sales.In 1994,  they released Same as It Ever Was. The album peaked at 12 equally on the Billboard 200, the U.S. Billboard Top Current Albums, the U.S. Billboard Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums, the U.S. Billboard Top Album Sales, and is certified gold. AllMusic gave it four out five stars. Matt Carlson of The Michigan Daily found the album quite good and noted "the music is laid back with some heavy driving forces underlying and strengthening it". J.D. Constantine of The Baltimore Sun did not like album and found it monotonous and unimaginative. Roger Catlin of the Hartford Courant said that while finding the continuity monotonous it's "hard and compelling" as well as a "strong outing". Andrew Love of The Ocala Star-Banner gave it four stars saying "this is a band that has definitely progressed over the course of one album". Music critic Robert Christgau, who did not like their previous and subsequent album, gave it an A- and described it as "the hardest hip hop of the year".In 1996, they released Truth Crushed to Earth Shall Rise Again. The album peaked at 47 on the Billboard 200, 47 on the U.S. Billboard Top Current Albums, 31 on the U.S. Billboard Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums, and 47 on the U.S. Billboard Top Album Sales. At the release party, Schrody decided to breakup the group. Dave Ferman of the Fort Worth Star-Telegram gave it one star and a half, calling it a "woeful mess". Steve Juon of RapReviews gave it a seven out of ten. AllMusic music gave it two point five stars out of five. Sputnikmusic wrote that "the trio’s most rounded, consistent & memorable LP is grossly under-appreciated."Also in 1996, O'Connor was announced to be part of the cast of Soleil Moon Frye directorial debut. The film was released in 1998 as Wild Horses.


=== 1997–2018: return from obscurity and back to prominence ===
After House of Pain disbanded, O'Connor said he struggled with drug abuse, a problem he developed when he became famous, and spent all the money he made from the group's success. He said he sobered up briefly in 2000 joining the twelve-step program but relapsed after a having a drink, and rejoined the program in 2005, and stayed sober ever since.Nevertheless, O'Connor continued being involved in musical projects and did freelance work such as logo designing, streetwear, and sneakers.In 2001, O'Connor's next group XSupermodels (XSM) only saw a promotional release for their album Artificial Intelligence. That year, he was the featured rapper in Powerman 5000's remake of the Frankie Goes to Hollywood hit song "Relax", on the Zoolander soundtrack.In late 2004, the creation of the rap supergroup La Coka Nostra started when O'Connor was mentoring young artists. O'Connor explains that he tool notice of two up and comers George Carroll (Slaine) and John Faster (Big Left) and brought them to meet his former DJ from House of Pain, Leor Diamant. They decided to make a group with an additional rapper, who didn't stay too long, that Diamant took under his wing, as well as O'Connor becoming its hype man and art director. The group started releasing music on MySpace, and went viral. Eventually, O'Connor felt that there was a void and asked experienced rapper William Braunstein (Ill Bill) to join. The group's name came about, when O'Connor teased other members with that nickname, after they had a night out.  Eventually, former House of Pain colleague Erik Schrody, showed interest to join. By 2008, the group consisted of O'Connor, Carroll, Diamant, Braunstein, and Schrody (who left some time after the first album was released).In 2005, the documentary film Just for Kicks about the sneaker phenomena and history in hip-hop, had its world premiere. O'Connor was among the producers. It won "Best Documentary", and "Best Overall Film" at the USVI Film festival. It was part of the official selection at Tribeca Film Festival, Sheffield Documentary Festival, Amsterdam Documentary Festival, Bangkok International Film Festival, Res Fest, New York Latino Film Festival, San Francisco Black Film Festival, NYC Urban World Festival, Leipzig Documentary Festival, and US Virgin Islands Film Festivals.In 2009, La Coka Nostra released A Brand You Can Trust was released on July 14, 2009, on Suburban Noize Records. It sold over 500,000 units. AllMusic gave four out of five stars. Andrew Kameka of HipHopDX wrote that "the album is a mostly solid effort and exactly what someone would expect from a supergroup of like-minded members known for high-energy music". Adam Kennedy of the BBC while praising some the moments of the album said "it’s a tantalising parting taste of potential capabilities, yet until they improve a customer satisfaction hit rate that barely troubles one in three tunes here". Steve Juon of RapReviews gave it a seven out of ten. Thomas Quinlan of Exclaim! said "La Coka Nostra are an interesting collection of collaborators that live up to the hype".Also in 2009, House of Pain reunited at a private event held by UFC president Dana White in Boston on St. Patrick's Day. It was officially announced on August 10, 2010, that House of Pain had reunited and performed their first "official" show in a decade at the second annual Epicenter music festival in Fontana, California, on September 25, 2010. Though Diamant is still a member of the group, he did not join them on their 2011 reunion tour due to prior obligations with Limp Bizkit. In April–May 2011 House of Pain attended the Groovin' the Moo touring festival in Australia, and also performed at Scotland's T in the Park festival on July 9, 2011, as well as Sonisphere UK Festival on July 12 of the same year. House of Pain reunited in 2017 for a 25th Anniversary Tour. The tour included shows in DC, Ohio, Pennsylvania, New York, Massachusetts, and California.Finally that year, while touring, they had a three day layover in Tulsa, Oklahoma. O'Connor took advantage of this free time to visit the town and found the location of the house used by the main characters in the filmThe Outsiders (1983). He took a picture, posted it on MySpace, and the photo went viral. This led O'Connor to found The Delta Bravo Urban Exploration Team. With team-members in Los Angeles, Chicago, and New York City, they visit documents notable pop culture landmarks from film, television, music, and true crime. One of their speciality is to show a photo of what the location looks like now to compared it to what it looked like when it was part of something that gained notoriety. Delta Bravo identified locations from movies and television shows including Fast Times at Ridgemont High (1982), Saturday Night Fever (1977), Valley Girl (1983), The Bad News Bears (1976), All in the Family (1971 to 1979), Gilligan's Island (1964 to 1967), etc.In 2012, separately from The Delta Bravo Urban Exploration Team, La Coka Nostra released their second album, Masters of the Dark Arts. It reached 176 on Billboard Top Current Albums, 40 on Independent Albums, and 31 on Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums. Adam Fleischer of XXL magazine noted that "La Coka Nostra remain decidedly true to their core with their new album" and "that they are indeed masters of the dark arts". HipHopDX gave the album a positive review and noted that the album was a "sinister, happily violent detour from the pop-centric". Peter Marrack of Exclaim! also gave the album a positive review and noted that the album was "more or less a one-way ticket to hell". Nathan G. O'Brien of Scene Point Blank gave it four out five star and said "with Master of the Dark Arts La Coka Nostra’s pluperfect union of bombastic boom-bap, record scratching, and realism-based hardcore rhyming".In 2016, La Coka Nostra released To Thine Own Self Be True. The album reached 38 on the Billboard Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums. Steve Juon of RapReviews gave eight point five out of ten and wrote "for a blissful 45 minutes it's an uncut dose of that nostalgia straight through the ear canals to the dopamine centers of my brain".That same year, the film Let Me Make You a Martyr premiered, in which O'Connor plays a role.


=== 2019–present: The Outsiders House museum and current works ===
O'Connor, a lifelong fan of S. E. Hinton's book The Outsiders and its film adaptation, opened The Outsiders House Museum in Tulsa, Oklahoma, on August 9, 2019. Since 2009, when discovering the house where the lead characters of the film, the Curtis Brothers, lived in Tulsa, Oklahoma. O'Connor always had the thought of buying it, which he eventually did in 2016. O'Connor said he bought it sight unseen and when he first went inside that it was falling apart. With the help of friends, the Oklahoma Film and Music Office, the City Council, local business and individuals who volunteered the restoration started. After raising funds the house went through extensive renovations to restore it and maintain its authenticity from the film. A GoFundMe was set up for additional funds, notable donors include Jack White who donated $30,000 and Billy Idol. Also to raise funds, screenings of the film were organized that actor C. Thomas Howell (one of the film's lead) attended. Also in 2016, the street signs on the corner were changed to "The Outsiders way" and "The Curtis Brothers Lane". Since its opening, the museum now contains a collection of The Outsiders memorabilia. On the quiz show Jeopardy! a question about him and the museum was showcased ''Rapper Danny Boy O'Connor loved the Tulsa house used in the film version of this author's The Outsiders so he restored it''. For his efforts on preserving a cultural landmark O'Connor received a key to the city of Tulsa.On November 1 of that year, the institution installed a plaque commemorating in a scene Rumble Fish (1983), another film directed by Coppola based on a Hinton novel shot in Tulsa, in the alley south of 5th Street between Main Street and Boston Avenue.In 2021, separately from The Delta Bravo Urban Exploration Team and The Outsiders House museum, O'Connor acted in the suspense film Ida Red. That same year he was a prominent interviewee in Soleil Moon Frye's documentary Kid 90.On June 3, 2022, O'Connor released a photography exhibit named ''We saw the same sunset'' at Mother Road Market. It shows the photos of a thousand sunset taken from the same window on the thirteenth floor of the Mayo Hotel. O'Connor said, “This exhibit is my love letter to Tulsa, when I moved from L.A. to Tulsa five years ago, I was awestruck by Tulsa’s sunsets. I love the idea that we all share the same sunset regardless of our differences, bringing us a step closer to each other.” On June 10, the short documentary Old House New Home, where O'Connor is credited as an executive producer, premiered at the DeadCENTER Film Festival, where it won the best Okie short award. The documentary is about O'Connor's effort to preserve the house from The Outsiders. At the same festival the thriller film Out for Exile premiered. In it O'Connor plays a role.In October 2022, O'Connor with The Outsiders House Museum published the book The Outsiders ‘Rare and Unseen’, which contains 148 photos by David Burnett who was the set's photographer. O'Connor said: “We originally got the first lot of photos and then [Burnett] said there may be more. They found the rougher photos, and for me, that’s where the rubber meets the road because they’re unpolished, their guard’s down, they’re not posing".In 2023, O'Connor acted in two John Swab's films Little Dixie, and One Day as Lion.On April 14 of that year, as part of a 40th anniversary celebration of the release of The Outsiders, O'Connor installed a plaque commemorating the film which was installed at the Admiral Twin drive-In where a scene was shot.Currently, O'Connor serves as a member of the Arts Commission of City of Tulsa. This came about when the Mayor searched for Tulsans willing to volunteer their time to City of Tulsa Authority, Board or Commission. The initiative is meant to have a citizen committees with a range of interests and their advice to develop future policies.


== Personal life ==
During the height of House of Pain, O'Connor had a friendship with Mickey Rourke and was romantically involved with Soleil Moon Frye (with whom he maintains a friendship). He is also friends with Robert Romanus.


== Accolades ==
1992 - Grammy Award for Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group - "Jump Around" - Nomination - with House of Pain
2017 - Honorary High School Diploma - Will Rogers High School
2018 - Key to the city - Tulsa, Oklahoma


== Discography ==


=== with House of Pain ===
House of Pain (1992)
Same as It Ever Was (1994)
Truth Crushed to Earth Shall Rise Again (1996)


=== with XSupermodels ===
Artificial Intelligence (2001) promo album


=== with La Coka Nostra ===
A Brand You Can Trust (2009)
Masters of the Dark Arts (2012)
To Thine Own Self Be True (2016)


== Filmography ==


=== Actor ===
Who's the Man? (1993) - Steve
Wild Horses (1998)
Let Me Make You a Martyr  (2016) - Willie
Ida Red (2021) - Bird
Out for Exile (2022)
Little Dixie (2023) - Coka
One Day as Lion (2023) - Prison Guard MacDougal


=== Interviewee ===
Kid 90 (2021)


=== Producer ===
Just for Kicks (2005)
Old House New Home (2022)


== Bibliography ==
2022 - The Outsiders ‘Rare and Unseen’ - with David Burnett


== References ==


== External links ==
Danny Boy on Instagram
Danny Boy at MySpace
Delta Bravo Urban Exploration Team at FacebookDarien Corey Dash, Jr. (born July 21, 1992), known professionally as Dash (stylized as Da$H), is an American rapper. Apart from his solo career, Dash was a member of Heir Global, alongside former friend and collaborator, Retch. Dash is also an affiliate of ASAP Mob, making his first high-profile appearance on their debut mixtape Lords Never Worry, in 2012. He frequently works with record producer Mordecai Beats, with whom he released the mixtape La Cienega (2012). Da$h has also collaborated with several prominent rappers in the hip-hop industry, including Ab-Soul, Action Bronson, Earl Sweatshirt, Vince Staples, Suicideboys, and Mac Miller.


== Musical career ==


=== 2010–14: Career beginnings and V.I.C.E.S. ===
Dash began rapping around the age of 16 and subsequently uploaded music on MySpace. Dash first gained major recognition in August 2012, when he appeared on three tracks from East Coast hip hop ASAP Mob's debut mixtape, Lord$ Never Worry. Also in 2012, Dash formed the hip hop duo The Heirs (or The H'z for short), which stands for High Everyday Ignoring Rules, with fellow New Jersey-based rapper RetcH. In 2013, Dash released his sixth solo mixtape V.I.C.E.S. (which stands for Very Ignorant Content Exposing Success), to moderate success. The mixtape features guest appearances from Action Bronson, Vince Staples, as well as ASAP Mob members ASAP Nast and ASAP Ferg, among others. The production was handled by Larry Fisherman, Randomblackdude, Thelonious Martin and more. Dash followed up with the release of a two-track extended play (EP) titled, That Time We Smoked Dust (2014), in collaboration with RetcH.
In 2014, in an interview with New York music magazine The Fader, former Odd Future member Earl Sweatshirt said that Dash was staying at his apartment in Los Angeles, and that they were working on music together. Earl had previously produced the track "Whalé" from V.I.C.E.S, as well as appearing with him on Mac Miller's track, "New Faces".


=== 2015–present: Skrewface and 17 More Minutes ===
In 2015, Da$h released an EP titled Skrewface, followed by a mixtape titled 17 More Minutes. Music videos were released on Da$h's YouTube page for the tracks "RicHie K II," "Hello," and "Seymour," along with a short video series, "DEADMANWALKIN," a documentary-style installation following his experiences on the "Live Now x Die Later" concert tour. In 2017, Da$h released his debut album Loose Skrew, which was released under his independent label H'z Global. He would later go on to release two more albums under H'z Global; 5 Deadly Venoms in 2019 with rapper V Don, and Walk The Plank in 2020.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===


=== EPs ===


=== Mixtapes ===


=== Singles ===


==== As lead artist ====


==== As featured artist ====


=== Guest appearances ===


== References ==


== External links ==
Official page on Bandcamp
Dash discography at DiscogsSidney Royel Selby III (born May 3, 1997), known professionally as Desiigner, is an American rapper and singer. He is best known for his December 2015 debut single "Panda", which topped the Billboard Hot 100. Shortly after the song gained viral status online, he signed to Kanye West's GOOD Music, an imprint of Def Jam Recordings until becoming an independent artist in 2019.
In July 2016, he released the follow-up single "Tiimmy Turner", which peaked at number 34 on the Billboard Hot 100. Despite this, Desiigner is frequently described as a one-hit wonder.


== Early life ==
Desiigner was born on May 3, 1997, in Brooklyn, New York City. He is of Afro-Barbadian and African American descent, and is the grandson of blues musician Sidney "Guitar Crusher" Selby. He grew up in the Louis Armstrong housing projects in the Bedford–Stuyvesant neighborhood. He began practicing vocals at school choir and church. At the age of 14, he embarked on his musical career.


== Career ==
Desiigner embarked on his music career under his original nickname Dezolo, before he began releasing his work under the alias of Designer Royel, especially with Royel (his middle name). His sister convinced him to drop the "Royel" part and then keep the "Designer" part as his new stage name, doubling the "I"'s. On December 3, 2015, under his new pseudonym, Desiigner released his debut track, called "Zombie Walk". The song was produced by The Shell God. On December 15, 2015, Desiigner released his commercial debut single, titled "Panda" on SoundCloud. The song released on iTunes five days later, before being re-released as of February 2016. On February 11, 2016, Desiigner signed a recording contract with Kanye West's GOOD Music imprint, under the aegis of Def Jam Recordings. After signing a record deal, Desiigner subsequently appeared on two tracks — "Pt. 2" (which features an interpolation of "Panda") and "Freestyle 4" — that were taken from Kanye West's seventh album The Life of Pablo. Desiigner then went on to perform at the 2016's South by Southwest (SXSW) music festival. In an interview with Billboard, Desiigner confirmed the release of his first upcoming mixtape, titled Trap History Month.On May 5, 2016, producer Mike Dean announced that he would be serving as the executive producer for Desiigner's upcoming debut studio album. On May 24, Desiigner announced that the title to his upcoming debut album would be called The Life of Desiigner. In June 2016, XXL magazine revealed their annual "Freshmen Class" for 2016, and Desiigner was included on the list with nine other new artists. In June 2016, "Champions" was released as the lead single from the GOOD Music's upcoming compilation album, Cruel Winter. Desiigner made a guest appearance on this track, alongside his label-mate Kanye West, and other rappers such as Gucci Mane, Big Sean, 2 Chainz, Travis Scott, Yo Gotti and Quavo. In the same month, Desiigner made his US television debut, when he performed his single, "Panda" at the 2016's BET Awards. On June 26, 2016, Desiigner released his first full-length mixtape, titled New English on Tidal, following a live premiere of the mixtape on June 22. In July 2016, American pop singer Demi Lovato brought out Desiigner at their concert in New York. On July 21, 2016, Desiigner premiered the track, called "Tiimmy Turner", which was released as a single on iTunes the next day. Desiigner appeared as a special guest on the Netflix series Bill Nye Saves the World. On November 7, 2017, it was reported that BTS would release a remix of their song "Mic Drop" featuring Desiigner and remixed by Steve Aoki. It was set to be released on November 17, 2017, but was postponed and released on November 24, 2017, instead.

On May 3, 2018, Desiigner announced via social media that his debut EP, L.O.D., would be released at midnight on May 4, 2018.In 2020, Desiigner released "Diva" under his independent label LOD Records.In a 2022 interview with VladTV, Desiigner explained why he left GOOD Music in 2019, saying he was "going through a little mental thing" including his father having been comatose, and had tried to contact Kanye and his other labelmates for guidance but didn't receive any.On the morning of November 1, 2022, Desiigner went to Instagram Live saying "I'm done rapping," after hearing the news of Migos rapper Takeoff's death from a shooting in Houston, Texas that same morning. Despite this, he returned to rap on November 26th and released a new song and music video.


== Legal issues ==
On September 8, 2016, Desiigner and three other people were arrested in New York City, after a 911 caller claimed that he pulled a gun on them. Desiigner was later found in an SUV with four other people and the vehicle was searched. The police allegedly found oxycodone and guns, for which he and the other individuals received drug and weapon charges. They were all detained in custody. On September 10, 2016, his felony gun charge was dropped by prosecutors. He was cleared of the charges on September 12, 2016, when it was found that the pills were anabolic steroids belonging to his driver.In April 2023, Desiigner was charged with indecent exposure after allegedly being caught on a Delta Air Lines flight masturbating in front of flight attendants while travelling from Tokyo to Minneapolis.


== Musical style ==
Desiigner's musical style is influenced by Southern hip hop, namely trap music which originated in Atlanta, Georgia. His rapping technique and vocals have been heavily compared to that of Atlanta-based rapper Future. When asked about the frequent comparisons, he told Complex: "God gave him a blessing, but he gave me a blessing too. I ain't gonna doubt the man's music. He makes beautiful music too. Music is made every day. Big ups to him, big ups to Future. I actually like Future's music. I like his music, you feel me. I'm not a hater or a critic on him, you know, I do me. God bless him, God bless me."


== Discography ==

New English (2016)
L.O.D. (2018)


== Awards and nominations ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official websiteSean Edward George (born November 9, 1978), known by the stage name Diabolic, is an American rapper. He started receiving fame after his verse on Immortal Technique's song "Dance with the Devil". He is also a well-known battle rapper who has battled with rappers such as Immortal Technique, MC Jin, Mecca, Iron Solomon and Rhymefest, among others. He released The Foul Play Mixtape in October 2006.
In 2010, Diabolic released Liar & A Thief, which was produced by Engineer with the exception of the song "Riot" featuring Deadly Hunta, which was produced by John Otto of Limp Bizkit on live drums. The album featured guest appearances from Immortal Technique, Canibus, Vinnie Paz, and Ill Bill, and won the 2010 HHUG Album of the Year award. His debut album was also listed on Billboard's R&B/Hip-Hop Albums chart at #76 in April 2010. He released his most recent album, The Disconnect, in 2019.


== Biography ==
George was born in 1978 in Huntington Station on Long Island and was raised there. He grew up in a lower-middle-class family in a suburban neighborhood. His interest in hip-hop started when he listened to his older brother's hip-hop tapes, featuring artists such as EPMD, N.W.A, and Black Sheep. In his early teens, he became interested in graffiti and writing his own lyrics.
In late 1999, he took his talent to the New York City underground and made a name for himself in a number of high-profile battles in the New York City venue, the Wetlands.
In 2003, Immortal Technique was touring nationally and supported him. Diabolic was working on his debut album entitled Liar & a Thief and found a producer in Vancouver named Engineer. They worked heavily together and released Liar & a Thief. He was featured on a King Syze album Collective Bargaining, the song was titled The Strike Line and featured Army of the Pharaohs.
On January 28, 2012, Diabolic confirmed the launch of his own record label, "WarHorse Records".
On February 10, 2012, Diabolic released a diss track to Tyler, the Creator over the instrumental of Tyler's own "Yonkers". The track was a response to the title track of Goblin, where Tyler mentions Immortal Technique.
In 2016, a feud was ignited between Diabolic and a fellow New York rapper, Talib Kweli. After a back-and-forth on Twitter in April in which Diabolic accused Kweli of making generalizations about "White Rappers", Kweli penned an article in May titled When ‘White Fragility’ Affects Rappers, in which he discussed his views on white rappers and referenced Diabolic.


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===
Liar & a Thief (2010)
Fightin' Words (2014)
Collusion (with Vanderslice) (2019)
The Disconnect (2019)


=== Mixtapes ===
The Foul Play Mixtape (2006)


=== EPs ===
Triple Optix EP (2000)


== References ==


== External links ==
Diabolic's channel on YouTube
Diabolic on Reddit
Diabolic on Bandcamp
Diabolic on DiscogsRami Matan Even-Esh (Hebrew: רמי מתן אבן-אש; born August 26, 1981), known professionally as Kosha Dillz, is an Israeli-American rapper.


== Early life and education ==
Rami Even-Esh was born in Perth Amboy, New Jersey to Israeli immigrant parents and was raised in Edison, New Jersey, spending summers in Kiryat Tiv'on, Israel. He rhymes in English, Hebrew, Yiddish and Spanish. A graduate of Rutgers University, he was a member of the wrestling team and studied creative writing, which he has said helped to expand his writing skills. In his youth, he played the trumpet.He was initially exposed to hip hop at Bar Mitzvah dances, and when he heard the “funky beats in the background” of “old school bike videos” he would watch with his brother.


== Career ==
Even-Esh started rapping at the age of 17. For several years beginning in 1999, he was heavily involved with the freestyle battle rap scene at Nuyorican Poets Café in New York City. Other prominent participants were Mos Def, Immortal Technique and C-Rayz Walz. That same year, he attended an MF Doom concert at The Wetlands, and recalls, "That’s when I knew I loved the underground hip hop scene. That show and Braggin' Rights at Nuyorican Poets Café changed my life for sure."He originally went by Kosher Dill, saying, "I was Jewish and I wanted something cool." He changed his name to KD Flow when he was in the battle scene because he was "ashamed" of his MC name's Jewish association. After some substance abuse issues and a stint in jail, he became Kosha Dillz, coinciding with a decision to return to his Jewish identity.Kosha Dillz put out his first 12-inch, "Chainsaw Music," in 2005. In 2006, he appeared alongside Matisyahu on the song "Childhood" off the C-Rayz Walz album The Dropping. Two years later, C-Rayz contacted Kosha about collaborating. They released Freestyle vs. Written, an album on which Kosha rapped written verses, and Walz freestyled. Okayplayer stated that the album contains “witty, irreverent lyrics and candor.”2009 saw the release of his debut solo LP, Beverly Dillz, recorded in Beverly Hills with local producer Belief. A lot of the LP was written while "in socks on a couch." Okayplayer called the album “an interesting mix of danceable tracks and powerful rhyming” and "at times wildly original and entertaining."Since 2011, he has been at work on a documentary, Kosha Dillz Is Everywhere, about his life as an Israeli-American Jewish hip hop artist. Along with Snoop Dogg and Drake, Kosha has a playable character in the basketball video game NBA 2K11. His song "Cellular Phone" was featured in a Bud Light commercial that debuted in 2012 during Super Bowl XLVI.In 2013, Kosha's second solo album, Awkward In a Good Way, was released on Murs' label, Murs 316. Murs and producer Jesse Shatkin under the alias Belief, assisted in shaping the feel of the album. The album also featured Gangsta Boo of Three 6 Mafia.What I Do All Day And Pickle was released on July 15, 2016 on Oy Vey!, led by the single "Dodging Bullets" featuring reggae artist Matisyahu. The video for "Dodging Bullets" premiered on Billboard on June 28, 2016. What I Do All Day And Pickle peaked at number 15 on the Billboard Heatseekers Albums chart, number 42 on the Billboard Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums, and number 50 on the Billboard Independent Albums chart.In march of 2020 Kosha collaborated and was featured on a song with EDM artist Kaskade called "Sexy". On October 16, 2020 Dillz released his 14 track album "Nobody Cares Except you" that was crowdfunded on Kickstarter.On October 26, 2021 Dillz was freestyle rapping outside New York Knicks Game during a Nor'easter in New York City and caught the attention of rapper Fat Joe who walked by. Fat Joe started rapping with Kosha and the performance was caught on video which caused the performance to go viral.October 30, 2021 Fat Joe was performing with DJ Nasty (Johnny David Mollings) of Nasty Beatmakers at the Maxim Masquerade party in Denver, Co and invited Kosha Dillz up on stage to perform after seeing him in the crowd. UNILAD made a short documentary on Kosha after they saw the performance.In 2022, the Jewish Journal named him one of "The Top 10 Jewish Reality TV Stars of All Time."


== Performances ==
Kosha has toured and performed with a variety of artists, including Ghostface Killah, Snoop Dogg, Matisyahu, Cage the Elephant, C-Rayz Walz, Yak Ballz and Aesop Rock. He won the 2009 Hot 97 "Summer Jam" Rap Battle at Giants Stadium. He performed at Sundance in 2009 and South By Southwest in 2010. He performed in 2011 on the Yo Gabba Gabba! Live tour. He hosted official showcases at South By Southwest in 2015, 2016 and 2017, called Kosha Dillz Presents: Oy Vey.


== Honors ==
Kosha was honored as one of The Jewish Week's 2013 36 Under 36, an annual list of "young visionaries reshaping and broadening the Jewish community." He was also mentioned as #14 on BuzzFeed's 2016 List of Best Jewish Rappers: Passover Edition.


== Artistic style ==
Kosha has said the majority of opportunities he's received in his career stem from wowing crowds with his freestyle ability, which eventually earned him notice from RZA of the Wu Tang Clan, with whom he has since recorded, on the 2010 track "Operator," also featuring Kool G Rap. RZA calls Kosha "one of the rawest Jewish kids I know, proving again that hip-hop comes in all shapes, sizes, forms and races." The Los Angeles Times observed, "Though he's a technically skilled rhymer, Dillz's greatest gift is his willingness to engage the crowd. He'll do goofball Russian dance kicks, crack jokes and single out individual audience members."Kosha is influenced by Wu Tang Clan, Mobb Deep and jazz artists such as Herb Alpert. Growing up, he listened to Nas, Notorious B.I.G., Wu Tang Clan, Rancid, Green Day, Metallica, Pantera and "music in Hebrew."


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===


=== Extended plays ===


== References ==


== External links ==

Official websiteChristopher Saint Victor (born November 16, 1995), better known by his stage name Flipp Dinero, is an American rapper, singer, and songwriter. He is best known for his 2018 single "Leave Me Alone", which is certified 4× platinum by the RIAA, and has since received over 600 million plays on Spotify. Being from Brooklyn, New York, he was later able to connect with another Brooklyn, New York rapper, Joey Badass who later co-signed him along with the record labels Cinematic Music Group, Epic Records, and We the Best Music group.In 2018, Dinero gained recognition when football wide-receiver Odell Beckham Jr. danced to "Leave Me Alone" and when NBA champion Jordan Bell rapping to the song on Instagram Causing the song to go viral. The song peaked at 20 on the Billboard Hot 100 in 2019 and later went triple platinum.


== Early life ==
Flipp Dinero is from the Canarsie neighborhood of Brooklyn and of Haitian descent. He was raised in a Christian home and grew up attending private school in New York.


== Career ==
Flipp Dinero's music combines R&B and gospel singing with rapping, hip-hop, and trap music. His music career began in 2016 with support of his brother, Lows, a sound engineer. Lows promoted Flipp's music and connected him with other artists. During this time, Flipp Dinero received early recognition from Brooklyn-based rapper Joey Badass who had heard his tracks, Smoke2This, I Do, and others. Flipp Dinero signed with Cinematic Music Group that summer of 2016 and then later signed with record labels, Epic Records and DJ Khaled's We the Best Music Group.
In 2017, Flipp Dinero was featured five times on Spotify's popular hip-hop 'Most Necessary' playlist. Later in 2017, Flipp made his first performance on Complex, with his single "I do." This led to the release of his debut EP titled The Guala Way which was released in June 2017 and which reached over 2 million streams.With the help of his brother, Flipp Dinero recorded and released his hit song, "Leave Me Alone" in 2018. The song was written as an expression of his troubles with a woman that would not leave him alone. In 2018 his song "Leave Me Alone" aired on multiple radio stations. "Leave Me Alone" was later recognized by the Cleveland Browns' NFL football player, Odell Beckham Jr., who posted a dancing video to this song on Instagram, which led the song to "go viral" and increase rapidly in popularity. Months later, famous Canadian rapper, singer, songwriter, Drake, featured "Leave Me Alone" on his Instagram Story as a song which had inspired him while producing his new album Scorpion. "Leave Me Alone", became certified platinum by the RIAA on January 15, 2019 and later went double-platinum on May 23, 2019.In 2019, Flipp Dinero was featured on hip-hop media company XXL 2019 Freshman class after performing his freestyle "What I do". Later in 2019, Flipp released his album Love for Guala, which reached #132 on US Billboard 200. Flipp Dinero's record, "How I Move", came to be because he wanted to share his current experiences in Canarsie as a rapper being from an area that where not many people have or are able to obtain big money in their pockets.Flipp includes the word "Guala" into his album titles. The lifestyle term is a reference to Gods, Unique, Accolade, Life, Acquired and holds great meaning to him.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===


=== Mixtapes ===


=== EPs ===
The Guala Way (2017)
Table for One (2021)


=== Singles ===


==== As lead artist ====
Notes


==== As featured artist ====


== Television performances ==
Flipp Dinero performed his song "Leave Me Alone" for both the 2018 Hip-Hop BET Awards and the 2019 BET awards.


== References ==Disco King Mario (July 1, 1956 – May 21, 1994) In the 1970s, Mario was a prominent African American DJ and pioneer of Hip Hop, known as a “Founding Father of Hip Hop” in the Bronx, New York. At the time, he lived in the Bronxdale Housing projects, where his parties made him well-known locally. Mario’s family hailed from Edenton, NC, which was the place of his birth.


== DJing ==
In the 1970s Hip Hop was first being pioneered. In The Bronx at block parties it was the DJ's that were the primary artists, with the rappers being secondary. Mario put on many early shows in the Rosedale park, 'Big Park', in The Bronx. At this time Mario with his crew, known as Chuck Chuck City, played largely up-tempo disco music.Mario's earlier sound system had been pieced together over years. Influenced by Kool DJ Dee and Tyrone the Mixologist he upgraded his sound system. He was known for the quality of his sound system.Mario and fellow hiphop pioneer Bambaataa were both members of the Black Spades gang. The territory they controlled included most of the southeast Bronx. DJs had to either get their permission before they could safely DJ publicly.


== Influence ==
Disco King Mario never released any records.  His pioneering role in the genesis of Hip Hop did not lead to the nationwide celebrity as either a performer of a producer, which a number of other early rap and hip hop performers enjoyed.
Afrika Bambaataa started out as an assistant to Mario, and Mario loaned Bambaataa the technical equipment for his first appearances as DJ, and Bambaataas first DJ-Battle took place in 1976 in the New York Junior High School 123 against Mario. DJ Jazzy Jay had his first appearances as well with Mario.
Mario was also an influence on rapper Busy Bee Starski, helping him to develop his voice.Busy Bee Starski referenced Mario on his 1988 track Old School from the album Running Thangs.
Grandmaster Caz referenced Mario on his 2005 "untitled" song on grandgood records, released as a 7inch vinyl record.


== Memorials ==
In Rosedale Park, The Bronx, where Mario once played in the 1970s he was honored by many hip-hop icons like Grand Master Melle Mel, Kurtis Blow and many female pioneers like Lisa Lee and many others.
In 2023, Rosedale Avenue was officially co-named Disco King Mario Way in honor of how the DJ sculpted Hip Hop prior to it going mainstream before 1973.


== Personal life ==
Disco King Mario died aged 38 on May 21, 1994 at 10:30 AM in Saint Barnabas Hospital, Bronx, N.Y. after struggling with a crack cocaine addiction.


== References ==Luis Cedeño (born August 11, 1961), more commonly known as DJ Disco Wiz  is an American DJ.
He is noted as being the first Latino DJ in Hip-Hop.


== Old School ==
He was born in the Bronx, New York City, United States, to a Puerto Rican father and a mother from Cuba.
After being inspired at a Kool Herc jam by the emerging hip hop movement taking place in The Bronx, DJ Disco Wiz collaborated with his best friend, Casanova Fly (Grandmaster Caz), to form a group called the Mighty Force crew. Mighty Force is noted as being one of the first Hip-Hop DJ crews in the mid-to-late 1970s. Noted for their DJ battles in the streets of the South Bronx, the Mighty Force crew was also responsible for presenting the first Latino rapper to the world, Prince Whipper Whip, who is also of Puerto Rican descent. DJ Disco Wiz is also credited for being the first DJ to create a "mixed plate" in 1977 (Hip-Hop's first mixed dub recording) when he and Grandmaster Caz, combined sound bites, special effects and paused beats.


== New School ==
The grandson of the late Puerto Rican artist and Santero Norberto Cedeño; (La Mano Poderosa, 1950), Wiz is the creator of "The Hip-Hop Meets Spoken Wordz" series, a hip hop and poetry performance series that gives a voice to up-and-coming Latino talent in New York City. As a poet, DJ Disco Wiz has performed at the Apollo Theater and the landmark Nuyorican Poets Cafe and his poetry can be seen in the upcoming book Born in the Bronx. Wiz also appears in a few documentaries on hip-hop history including 1 LOVE, a film produced by noted hip-hop historian James "Koe" Rodriguez about the lives of Joe Conzo, Ernie Paniccioli, and Jamel Shabazz—hip-hop's first photographers.
Wiz has openly contributed to the community education of the formative years of hip-hop. In the millennium issue of The Source Magazine he candidly shared his experience in being the first Latino during the culture's evolution. He was also a major contributor in the opening of the Experience Music Project in Seattle, Washington in 2000. His contribution and donation of original hip-hop flyers, solely for the preservation of hip-hop can be seen as part of the archives. He was also instrumental in the making of Jim Fricke and Charlie Ahearn's rendition of the early years of hip-hop entitled Yes, Yes Y’all; sharing numerous original flyers and first-hand accounts of the early years of hip-hop including an account of the historical New York City blackout of 1977.
He is also a board member of the Universal Federation for the Preservation of Hip Hop Culture, chaired by Afrika Bambaataa of the Universal Zulu Nation. The Federation also includes on its board; Grandmaster Caz, DJ Tony Tone, Kurtis Blow, GrandMaster Melle Mel, KRS-One, Lovebug Starski, Jorge “PopMaster Fabel” Pabon, and photographer Joe Conzo.
Wiz co-authored his memoirs with Simon & Schuster author Ivan Sanchez. The book is titled It’s Just Begun: The Epic Journey of DJ Disco Wiz, Hip-Hop’s First Latino DJ. The book was released on the Miss Rosen imprint of powerHouse Books in 2009.


== Television ==
The Emmy Nominated Vh1 Rock Doc ny77: the Coolest year in hell Developed by Nanette Burstein and Firehouse Films for Vh1.


== References ==


== Further reading ==


== External links ==
DJ Disco Wiz at IMDbEarl Simmons (December 18, 1970 – April 9, 2021), known professionally as DMX, was an American rapper and actor. He is regarded as one of the most important figures of 2000s hip hop. His music is characterized by his "aggressive" rapping style, with his lyrical content varying from hardcore themes to prayers.He began rapping in the early 1990s and released his debut album It's Dark and Hell Is Hot in 1998, to both critical acclaim and commercial success, selling 251,000 copies within its first week of release. DMX released his best-selling album, ... And Then There Was X, in 1999, which included the hit single "Party Up (Up in Here)". His 2003 singles "Where the Hood At?" and "X Gon' Give It to Ya" were also commercially successful. He was the first artist to debut an album at No.1 five times in a row on the Billboard 200 charts. DMX sold over 74 million records worldwide.DMX was featured in films such as Belly, Romeo Must Die, Exit Wounds, Cradle 2 the Grave, and Last Hour. In 2006, he starred in the reality television series DMX: Soul of a Man, which was primarily aired on the BET cable television network. In 2003, he published a book of his memoirs titled E.A.R.L.: The Autobiography of DMX.


== Early life ==
Earl Simmons was born on December 18, 1970, in Mount Vernon, New York. He was the son of 19-year-old Arnett Simmons and 18-year-old Joe Barker. Simmons was the middle child of the family; his mother had given birth to a daughter, Bonita, two years prior, and later gave birth to one daughter, Shayla, and two stillborn sons. His father, Barker, painted watercolor paintings of street scenes to sell at local fairs, having moved to Philadelphia to fulfill his career.In his childhood years, Simmons first suffered from physical violence at the hands of his mother and was diagnosed with bronchial asthma. He was raised as a Jehovah's Witness. He disassociated himself from the spirtuality after he was injured in an accident by a driver. At the age of five, his mother sent him to live with relatives in Yonkers' School Street housing apartments. After suffering from his mother's abuse, he was expelled from a middle school at the age of ten, having been sent to a group home. He then returned to Yonkers at age fifteen, sleeping in empty storage bins and befriending stray dogs. Due to poor grades at Yonkers Middle High School, Simmons was unable to finish his track and field team schedule. Broke, he robbed several students to find food and clothing for himself, as well as a leather collar and harness for his pet dog. He began carjacking.


== Musical career ==


=== 1985–1995: Career beginnings ===
His career began in 1985, when he beatboxed for a local rapper named Ready Ron. They would do small shows together where Ron would perform as a rapper, and DMX would beatbox and provide adlibs. After a while, he came to a realization that Ron was becoming more prominent on the scene, so he decided to start rapping himself, going by the name "DMX", meaning "Divine Master Of The Unknown" and later "Darkman X". After serving a 2-year prison sentence, he began writing his own lyrics and performing at the local recreation center for younger children. In 1988, while in prison for carjacking, he began dedicating almost all of his free time to writing lyrics and battling other inmates. During this time, he had created a style called "Spellbound" where he spelled each word out letter by letter. He and future rival, K-Solo, engaged in battles.He later made an appearance on The Stretch Armstrong and Bobbito Show in January 1991, where he provided a freestyle. The Source praised DMX in its Unsigned Hype column that highlighted unsigned hip-hop artists. DMX continued to put out mixtapes, and in 1992, was signed to the then-unknown Ruff Ryders Entertainment. Later that year, Columbia Records signed DMX to its subsidiary labels Chaos Records and Ruffhouse Records, which released his major debut single "Born Loser" in 1993. After the single didn't achieve as much success as expected due to poor promotion, he was terminated from his contract with Ruffhouse and became an independent artist.In January 1994, Death Row Records attempted to sign the rapper in a joint venture with Ruff Ryders, but it never materialized.


=== 1996–1997: Building hype and signing to Def Jam ===
After two years of struggling in the industry, his friend and associate, Irv Gotti, became the president of A&R at Def Jam Recordings. After showcasing for then-president Lyor Cohen, DMX was signed to Def Jam Recordings in May 1997.


=== 1998-2000: Debut album and commercial success ===
DMX recorded tracks from April 1997 to January 1998 for his debut album. During this time, his guest appearances on Mase's singles "24 Hrs. to Live" and "Take What's Yours", The Lox's single "Money, Power & Respect", and Def Jam labelmate LL Cool J's single "4, 3, 2, 1" created a strong buzz for his upcoming album. In February 1998, he released his debut major-label single "Get at Me Dog" on Def Jam Recordings. The single received an RIAA certification of gold. His first major-label album It's Dark and Hell Is Hot, which included the single "Ruff Ryders' Anthem", was then released in May 1998. The album debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 chart in the U.S. and sold over five million copies. In December 1998, he released his album Flesh of My Flesh, Blood of My Blood. It debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 and went multi-platinum. DMX became the only rapper alive to have his first two consecutive number-one Billboard 200 albums within a one-year period (seven months by calculation) and the first since Tupac Shakur; DMX's record would later be surpassed two different times in 2020 by YoungBoy Never Broke Again, who made the number one position with two albums in six months (a month down by proxy, making it the fastest) and also had three number one albums in ten months between 2019 and 2020, also beating another Billboard record by DMX involving a quantity of number one rap albums within a year.He released his third album ... And Then There Was X, on December 21, 1999. It was his third album to debut at number one on the Billboard 200. Its most popular single, "Party Up (Up in Here)", became his first top ten hit on the R&B charts, and was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Rap Solo Performance at the 2001 Grammy Awards. The album was certified six-times Platinum, and was also nominated for Best Rap Album at the 2001 Grammy Awards. In 2000, DMX also made a cameo appearance in the Sum 41 music video for "Makes No Difference".In late 2000, he joined other Hip Hop and Nu Metal artists on the Anger Management Tour. Appearing alongside Limp Bizkit, Godsmack and Sinnistar for the second half of the tour from November 24th to December 19th, 2000.


=== 2001–2004: Return to music ===
After improving his legal situation, DMX returned to the studio to complete his fourth album, The Great Depression. With its release on October 23, 2001, it was his fourth album to debut at number one on the Billboard 200, featuring the singles "Who We Be", "We Right Here", and "I Miss You". Despite the album's triple platinum certification, its commercial and critical success was lower than his previous album. His fifth album, Grand Champ, released in September 2003, once again debuted at number one on the Billboard 200, becoming his final album in his lifetime to do so. It included the singles "Where the Hood At?" and "Get It on the Floor". After its release, he informed the public that he planned to retire, intending for Grand Champ to be his final album.


=== 2005–2011: Year of the Dog...Again and The Definition of X ===
After conflict with Def Jam, and in exchange for signing Nas (his Belly co-star) to the label in a de facto trade, DMX signed to Columbia Records, Def Jam's former parent company, in January 2006, returning to the label since 1992. He recorded his sixth album, Year of the Dog... Again, while switching between the two labels, which caused numerous delays. It was released on August 1, 2006, and debuted at number two on the Billboard 200. He released two more singles, "Lord Give Me a Sign" and "We in Here". The album received mixed reviews from critics. On June 12, 2008, Def Jam released his greatest hits album, The Definition of X: The Pick of the Litter. In 2011, Def Jam released another compilation album, The Best of DMX, which features hit singles including "Where the Hood At?" and "X Gon' Give It to Ya". In 2009, DMX claimed he would pursue preaching in Jersey City, New Jersey as well as continue to produce music. He completed a Gospel music album prior to his incarceration. According to MTV, he had semi-retired to study the Bible in an effort to give messages behind the pulpit.


=== 2011–2013: Undisputed ===
On October 11, 2011, DMX performed at the 2011 BET Hip Hop Awards. He stated that he has been working "nonstop, every day" on his seventh album, which was titled Undisputed. A video for a new track titled "Last Hope" was released via the Internet on September 24, 2011, and was later included on The Weigh In EP released digitally on May 5, 2012. In late February 2012, Seven Arts Pictures acquired the catalog of DMX's music and signed DMX to a two-album deal. During a performance at New York's Santos Party House on December 25, 2011, DMX stated that the new album would be titled Undisputed and would be released on March 26, 2012. After numerous delays, the album was eventually released on September 11, 2012, and featured production from Swizz Beatz and J.R. Rotem with a guest appearance by MGK.


=== 2013–2021: Def Jam reunion and Exodus ===
In 2013, DMX announced he had begun working on his eighth studio album. He collaborated with producers Swizz Beatz and Dame Grease. In December, after regaining his passport, he embarked on a world tour with performances in Bulgaria and Kosovo. On January 7, 2015, Seven Arts Music announced that DMX would be releasing Redemption of the Beast the following week; however, close personal friend and recurring collaborator producer/rapper/entrepreneur Swizz Beatz and DMX's management confirmed that this was false. On January 13, 2015, Seven Arts Music released Redemption of the Beast, without acquiring a legal artist contract. On January 15, 2015, it was announced by DMX's brother/manager Montana that DMX was no longer signed to Seven Arts Music and that they would be taking legal action against Seven Arts Music for the unauthorized release of Redemption of the Beast.Long-time collaborator Swizz Beatz stated that two of the collaborators on the album would be Kanye West and Dr. Dre. His 2003 song "X Gon' Give It to Ya" was featured in the 2016 film Deadpool and in its trailers. On June 28, 2016, DMX released a new song titled "Blood Red" and produced by Divine Bars. On January 11, 2017, DMX released a new song produced by Swizz Beats titled "Bain Iz Back". On September 20, 2019, DMX signed a new record deal with Def Jam Recordings, reuniting with the label for the first time since his 2003 album Grand Champ. He joined fellow labelmate, LL Cool J, in the reunion with the label.DMX's eighth and posthumous studio album, Exodus, was released through Def Jam on May 28, 2021.


== Personal life ==


=== Religion ===
DMX was a born-again Christian, and stated that he read the Bible every day. While in jail, DMX stated that he had a purpose for being there: "I came here to meet somebody...Don't know who it was, but I'll know when I see him. And I came here to give him a message. And that message is Jesus loves them." DMX was a transitional deacon and aspired to become ordained as a pastor, stating that he received this call in 2009. In 2016, he gave a sermon at a church in Phoenix, Arizona.


=== Relationships and children ===
DMX was the father of 17 children from 11 different women. He married his childhood friend Tashera Simmons in 1999 and they were married for 11 years. They had four children together: Xavier (born 1992), Tacoma (born 1999), Sean (born 2002), and Praise Mary Ella (born 2005). In July 2010, after his first of three incarcerations that year, Tashera announced their separation. They remained friends, although in 2016, Tashera accused DMX of missing his $10,000/month child support payment.DMX had a daughter, Sasha (born 2002), with Patricia Trejo. In 2012, Trejo sued DMX for $1 million in unpaid child support. The case was settled in 2013.DMX and Monique Wayne, a Maryland resident, fought over her claim that he was the father of her son born in 2004. She sued him for defamation and for child support. After genetic testing proved that DMX was the father, in January 2008, DMX was ordered to pay Wayne $1.5 million, but a judge vacated the judgment in May 2008.DMX also fathered a child and two daughters in 2008 with Yadira Borrego.DMX's fifteenth child was born to his fiancée Desiree Lindstrom on August 16, 2016.On December 5, 2019, DMX's sixteenth and seventeenth children, twin boys, were born to Pebbles Junell.DMX did not have a will. As a result, legal battles ensued in probate courts following his death.


=== Finances and bankruptcies ===
DMX filed for bankruptcy three times. His first filing was on July 30, 2013, citing his child support obligations as his priority claim. The filing was challenged by the United States Trustee Program and was dismissed by the U.S. Bankruptcy Court in Manhattan on November 11, 2013.


=== Feud with Ja Rule ===
During the 1990s, DMX formed a close bond with fellow up-and-coming rappers Jay-Z and Ja Rule. The three collaborated many times and formed a group known as Murder Inc. The group was short-lived due to internal issues between DMX and Jay-Z. After the breakup of Murder Inc., DMX disparaged Ja Rule in interviews, accusing him of being a copycat, drawing comparisons between himself and what he saw as Ja stealing his signature "gruff" style of delivery.DMX released the diss track "They Want War" on a 2002 DJ Kay Slay mixtape; Ja Rule never directly responded. DMX also released the single "Go to Sleep" with Eminem and Obie Trice as part of the Cradle 2 the Grave soundtrack with numerous lines directed to Ja Rule. However, as time passed and the feud faded into obscurity, DMX said that he wanted to officially bring it to an end when he was released from prison in 2005: "Gotti came to me in jail and said I want to make peace with you and him. I was like, 'Alright Gotti, let's do it." Despite this, DMX and Ja Rule did not officially end their feud until 2009, at VH1's Hip Hop Honors.


=== Feud with Jay-Z ===
When DMX partnered with Jay-Z and Ja Rule in Murder Inc., there was a feud between the two, which also contributed to the failure of the group and working together. According to reports, the feud started in the early 1990s after a rap battle between the two, which led to DMX's disdain for Jay-Z. Prior to DMX's death, the feud, although it fizzled out over the years, continued on when DMX said in an Instagram video that he wanted to rap battle Jay-Z on Verzuz.


== Legal issues ==
DMX was in jail 30+ times for various offenses, including criminal possession of a weapon, robbery, assault, carjacking, animal cruelty, reckless driving, driving under the influence, unlicensed driving, drug possession, probation violation, failure to pay child support, pretending to be a federal agent, and tax evasion.


=== 1986–1988 ===
DMX was first sent to prison in 1986 after stealing a dog from a junkyard. He served a few months in the juvenile unit of Woodfield Prison in Valhalla, New York. Later this year he was sentenced to 2 years for another crime and sent to Industry Institution (Now named OCFS-Industry Residential Center) in upstate New York. However, in December 1986, just a few days after starting his sentence, he and his cellmate successfully escaped the prison and DMX returned home until his mother forced him to turn himself in and finish his sentence, which he did at the McCormick Juvenile Detention Centre in Brooktondale, New York. Simmons was sent to prison again in 1988 for carjacking, and was later moved to a higher security prison after attempting to extort a fellow inmate for drugs. He was released in the summer of 1988.


=== 1989 ===
DMX was charged with fourth degree grand larceny (155.30) in January 1989 and served a 9-month sentence. (As shown in police report shown in BET's Ruff Ryders Chronicles documentary. No reference available to cite)


=== 1992 ===
DMX was charged with criminal possession of a controlled substance in the seventh degree (220.03), no disposition reported
(As shown in police report shown in BET's Ruff Ryders Chronicles documentary. No reference available to cite)


=== 1993 ===
During his time in Baltimore DMX  was charged for multiple crimes. The first being in March, with him being charged with criminal sale in the third degree of a controlled substance (220.39), no disposition reported. The second being criminal possession of a controlled substance in the seventh degree (220.03), no disposition reported.
(As shown in police report shown in BET's Ruff Ryders Chronicles documentary. No reference available to cite)
It's possible DMX also served time in late 1993 since he claim he is "fresh off a bid" in his 1994 track "Can't Touch Me Kid". This is just theory since there is no evidence to support this claim.


=== 1994-1995 ===
In late 1994 DMX was sentenced and charged with criminal possession of weapon and served around a year (the exact time served/sentenced is unknown) in Valhalla Correctional Facility. (As shown in police report shown in BET's Ruff Ryders Chronicles documentary. No reference available to cite)  (as shown in December 1994 prison letter from DMX in DJ Superiors "The Man Who Walked The Dog" book, No reference available to cite). On his third day there, he spat in the face of a captain and was sentenced to 1 year and 1 month of solitary confinement. He was put in Lockdown Block 3K  and sometime in late 1995 finished his sentence.


=== 1998–1999 ===
When officers of the Fort Lee Police Department executed a search of his home in 1999, DMX promptly surrendered himself on weapons possession charges.
DMX faced a 1999 animal cruelty charge in Teaneck, New Jersey after a dozen pit bulls were found at his home there; the charge was dismissed after the performer agreed to accept responsibility and record public service announcements for an animal rights group.


=== 2000–2005 Metro NY ===
In 2000, DMX served a 15-day jail sentence for possession of marijuana.
DMX served another jail sentence in 2001 for driving without a license and possession of marijuana. His appeal to reduce the sentence was denied; rather, he was charged with assault for throwing objects at prison guards.
In January 2002, DMX pleaded guilty in New Jersey to 13 counts of animal cruelty, two counts of maintaining a nuisance, and one count each of disorderly conduct and possession of drug paraphernalia. He eventually plea-bargained down to fines, probation, and community service and starred in public service announcements against the dangers of guns and animal abuse.
In June 2004, DMX was arrested at the John F. Kennedy International Airport, on charges of cocaine possession, criminal impersonation, criminal possession of a weapon, criminal mischief, menacing, and driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol, while claiming to be a federal agent and attempting to carjack a vehicle. He was given a conditional discharge on December 8, 2004, but pleaded guilty on October 25, 2005, to violating parole.
On November 18, 2005, DMX was sentenced to 70 days in jail at Riker's Island for violating parole; the lateness charge added a 10-day extension to the original 60-day sentence. DMX was released early (for "good behavior") on December 30, 2005.


=== 2007 ===
In 2007, DMX's home was raided on reports of animal cruelty.


=== 2008–2011 Arizona and California ===
On May 9, 2008, DMX was arrested on drug and animal cruelty charges after attempting to barricade himself inside his home in Cave Creek, Arizona.
DMX pleaded guilty to charges of drug possession, theft, and animal cruelty stemming from an August 2007 drug raid as well as the May 2008 arrest, at a hearing on December 30, 2008; he was sentenced to 90 days in jail on January 31, 2009.
On May 22, 2009, DMX entered a plea agreement/change of plea and pleaded guilty to attempted aggravated assault in jail.
After serving four out of six months for violating drug probation, DMX was released from jail on July 6, 2010. That day, a television pilot was filmed to portray his road to recovery; however, DMX was arrested three weeks later and the pilot did not evolve into a series.
On July 27, 2010, DMX turned himself in to Los Angeles Metropolitan Court for a reckless driving charge he received in 2002. He was sentenced to serve ninety days in jail.
On November 19, 2010, DMX was arrested in Maricopa County, Arizona on charges of violating probation for a February 24, 2009 aggravated assault on an officer while he was incarcerated. On December 20, 2010, DMX was moved to the Mental Health Unit of the Arizona Alhambra State Prison, and released on July 18, 2011.
On August 24, 2011, DMX was arrested for the tenth time in Maricopa County, this time for speeding, recorded at 102 miles per hour (164 km/h) in a 65-mile-per-hour (105 km/h) zone, reckless driving, and driving with a suspended license. While DMX admitted to speeding, he claimed he was driving 85 miles per hour (137 km/h).


=== 2013 South Carolina ===
On February 13, 2013, DMX was arrested in Spartanburg, South Carolina for driving without a driver's license.
On July 26, 2013, DMX was arrested again in Greenville County, South Carolina and charged with driving under the influence of alcohol as well as driving without a license.
On August 20, 2013, DMX was arrested again in Greer, South Carolina during a traffic stop after a car he was a passenger in made an improper u-turn. He was arrested due to an outstanding warrant for driving under suspension. Four packages of marijuana were also found in the vehicle, and he along with the driver were cited for them.
On November 4, 2013, DMX was again arrested by the Greenville-Spartanburg International Airport police near Greer, South Carolina after police, who were familiar with his prior arrests, noticed DMX behind the wheel of a vehicle at the terminal. DMX was booked on charges of driving with a suspended license, having an uninsured vehicle, and driving an unlicensed vehicle. He was subsequently released after spending three hours in jail.


=== 2015 New York ===
On April 5, 2015, a man accused DMX of robbing him.
On June 26, 2015, DMX was arrested in New York, charged with robbery in Newark, New Jersey and failure to pay child support.
On July 14, 2015, DMX was sentenced to six months in jail for failure to pay $400,000 in child support.
On December 14, 2015, an arrest warrant was issued for DMX after he missed a court hearing to address child support issues with his ex-wife Tashera Simmons and their four children.


=== 2017–2019: Tax fraud conviction ===
In July 2017, DMX was charged with 14 federal counts of tax fraud. Federal prosecutors charged him with failing to file income tax returns from 2010 to 2015 (a period when he earned at least $2.3 million). DMX pleaded guilty to a single count of tax fraud in November 2017. DMX was originally free pending sentencing but was remanded to jail in January 2018 after leaving a drug treatment program ordered by the court and relapsing with cocaine and oxycodone. In March 2018, Judge Jed S. Rakoff sentenced DMX to one year in prison followed by three years of supervised release. The court also ordered DMX to pay $2.29 million in restitution to the government. He was released from prison on January 25, 2019.


== Health problems and death ==
Simmons claimed he became addicted to crack cocaine when he was 14 years old, after Ready Ron tricked him into smoking a marijuana cigarette laced with the drug.Simmons entered drug rehabilitation several times including in 2002, 2017, and 2019, when he cancelled concerts.On February 10, 2016, Simmons was found unresponsive in a parking lot at a Ramada Inn in Yonkers, New York. He was resuscitated by first responders and intravenously given Narcan, an opioid-reversal drug; he responded quickly to Narcan and became semi-conscious. Simmons was subsequently rushed to the hospital. A witness said he ingested some type of substance before collapsing, but police found no illegal substances on the property. Simmons stated that it was from an asthma attack.
On April 2, 2021, at approximately 11:00 pm, Simmons was rushed to White Plains Hospital, where he was reported to be in critical condition following a heart attack at his home possibly resulting from a drug overdose. The next day, his attorney Murray Richman confirmed Simmons was on life support. That same night, Simmons suffered cerebral hypoxia as paramedics attempted to resuscitate him for 30 minutes. Simmons's former manager, Nakia Walker, said he was in a "vegetative state" with "lung and brain failure and no current brain activity". His manager, SRC and Loud Records founder Steve Rifkind, stated Simmons was comatose and that he was set to undergo tests to determine his brain's functionality and his family will "determine what's best from there".On the morning of April 9, 2021, Simmons lost functionality in multiple essential organs, reportedly his liver, kidneys, and lungs, and was pronounced dead shortly after, at age 50. It was revealed on July 8 by the Westchester County Medical Examiner's Office that Simmons' official cause of death was a cocaine-induced heart attack.


== Legacy ==

Various celebrities paid tribute through outlets like social media including former NFL player Torrey Smith, LeBron James, Shaquille O'Neal, Eminem, Gabrielle Union (who co-starred with DMX in the 2003 film Cradle 2 the Grave, along with Jet Li (who also paid tribute)), Backstreet Boys member AJ McLean, Wyclef Jean, Swizz Beatz (who DMX collaborated with including on the hit single, "Ruff Ryders' Anthem"), Eve and Missy Elliott. Other tributors included Kelly Rowland, Chris Brown, Lil Durk, Big Sean, Polo G, Metro Boomin, The Weeknd, T.I., Jim Jones, Busta Rhymes, Viola Davis, Mary J. Blige, Al Sharpton, Angie Martinez, Ciara and various others.A "Celebration of Life" took place on April 24, 2021, led by Kanye West's Sunday Service Choir. They performed several songs in honor of DMX. The memorial took place at Barclays Center in Brooklyn with a limited capacity of 1,900. It was livestreamed on DMX's YouTube and Instagram accounts. On the way to Barclays, DMX's casket was carried by a black monster truck with "Long live DMX" painted on the side. A procession of hundreds of motorcyclists, in homage to the hip-hop collective Ruff Ryders, rode from DMX's birthplace of Yonkers, New York to Barclays Center. In between performances, people gave speeches including Eve, Nas, Swizz Beatz and Ruff Ryders founders Joaquin "Waah" Dean & Darin "Dee" Dean.
DMX's funeral ("DMX's Homegoing Celebration") took place in Brooklyn at the Christian Cultural Center on April 25, 2021. It was livestreamed on the BET Network and its YouTube channel. It lasted around five hours to a limited capacity of 2,000 people. DMX's casket was in the color red and featured the word "FAITH" in large printing. It was featured in the front of the room. People who were in attendance included Nas, Lil Kim, Alicia Keys and Swizz Beatz as well as the pastor of the church, Reverend A.R. Bernard. Louis Farrakhan, a leader of the Nation of Islam, joined the service via Zoom. With the exception of Alicia Keys, Nas and Lil Kim, they all gave speeches. DMX's former wife, Tashera Simmons and Ruff Ryders founders Waah & Dee also gave a speech. There was some controversial testimonies like former Def Jam chief Lyor Cohen, when his video featured an overhead view of a beach and explained how Earl Simmons was a wonderful man while DMX was a gremlin. Additionally, Def Jam cofounder Russell Simmons compared his own issues with drug abuse to DMX via video. The homegoing ended with DMX's obituary read on stage and a virtual performance from Faith Evans.At the funeral, New York City community leader and peacemaker Erica Ford presented DMX's family several citations and proclamations from the New York governor's and Senate's office, including a proclamation from the New York state Senate declaring December 18—DMX's birthday—"Earl 'DMX' Simmons Day." Additional citations came from Gov. Andrew Cuomo and Mayor Mike Spano of Yonkers (the hometown of DMX). Cuomo had the flag flying over the state capitol on the day of DMX's death presented to his family.On June 28, 2021, his music was represented by former Def Jam labelmate Method Man, close friend Swizz Beatz, Busta Rhymes and actor Michael K. Williams (who himself would pass away from drug intoxication five months later) at the BET Awards 2021.


=== Impact ===
DMX had a significant impact on hip hop music and is considered a "legend" in the genre. He's credited for having "defined 2000s rap" and for being "among the most prolific rappers of his era". He broke and set numerous records. His early work was vastly different from most mainstream hip hop music at the time; while Puff Daddy and other artists of the Bad Boy Records label were at the height of popularity, characterized by their "big-budget videos, lavish party-throwing, and dancefloor-ready music", DMX achieved success with a more dark, aggressive, "rugged", less "marketable" style.
According to an Apple Music radio host: "It was a complete 180...Puff was controlling the clubs; you were watching Bad Boy Records pop bottles, wear Rolexes, Jesus pieces, Coogi sweaters. Then here comes this crazy energetic figure from Yonkers with the Timbs and the bandanas, running around with pitbulls, giving a perspective on the streets that a lot of people weren't familiar with and taking command of what hip-hop didn't look like." DMX's commercially successful violent lyricism helped popularize the horrorcore genre.


== Discography ==

Studio albums

It's Dark and Hell Is Hot (1998)
Flesh of My Flesh, Blood of My Blood (1998)
... And Then There Was X (1999)
The Great Depression (2001)
Grand Champ (2003)
Year of the Dog... Again (2006)
Undisputed (2012)
Exodus (2021)


== Awards and nominations ==
Grammy Award

American Music Award

MTV Video Music Award

Billboard Music Award


== Filmography ==
Films

Video games

Television


== See also ==
Ruff Ryders
Murder Inc.


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==

DMX discography at Discogs 
DMX at IMDbTimothy J. Blair (January 3, 1967 – February 14, 2013), better known by his stage name Tim Dog, was an American rapper from the Bronx, New York, who rose to notoriety during the early 1990s with his debut LP Penicillin on Wax and the celebrated diss track "Fuck Compton". Tim had already appeared on songs with the Ultramagnetic MCs and went on to form a duo, Ultra, with member Kool Keith. "Fuck Compton" appeared in XXL magazine's "Top 25 Diss Tracks of All Time" and earned Tim Dog critical acclaim from progressive hip-hop producer Blockhead, who said Tim Dog's "The Dog's Gonna Getcha" (off Penicillin on Wax) is "quite possibly the hardest song ever made."Nas references Tim Dog on his track "Where Are They Now?" from his 2006 album Hip Hop Is Dead, and despite Tim Dog's feud with Dr. Dre, Eminem (whom Dre had discovered) name-checked him on the track "Ricky Ticky Toc".
On February 14, 2013, the media reported that Tim Dog died of complications from diabetes. By May 2013, he was under investigation for allegedly faking his death to avoid charges of grand larceny, and a warrant was issued in Mississippi for his arrest. However, on September 15, 2014, it was finally confirmed by NBC News that Tim Dog had indeed died on February 14, 2013, as had been initially reported. A death certificate was filed in DeKalb County, Georgia, putting an end to speculation that he was still alive and trying to avoid his court-mandated debts.


== Biography ==
During the early 1990s, seminal rap group N.W.A and several other West Coast rap artists were becoming popular within the hip hop community and magazines such as Word Up! and The Source provided significant coverage to artists from Los Angeles. The success of N.W.A and their focus on the South Central L.A. suburb of Compton via their platinum album Straight Outta Compton had spawned a number of imitators and other groups who also claimed to represent the suburb. The success of artists such as Compton's Most Wanted and DJ Quik led to a period in hip hop where so-called "gangsta rap" and its trademark dress of black Los Angeles Raiders and Los Angeles Kings gear were de rigueur.
Some New York hip hop artists resented the exposure and success of their West Coast counterparts, an animosity which Tim Dog would tap into via the release of his groundbreaking first single. Frustrated at the apparent lack of interest in East Coast artists from record companies, Tim recorded "Fuck Compton", a scathing diss track from his debut album Penicillin on Wax. "Fuck Compton" attacked the city's style of dress and musical output and made threatening gestures to several Compton rappers including Eazy-E, MC Ren, Ice Cube, Dr. Dre and Michel'le. Tim Dog would later exclude Ice Cube on "Step to Me", another diss track attacking N.W.A.
The lyrics also made reference to an infamous incident involving N.W.A's Dr. Dre and Pump It Up host Dee Barnes. Barnes had accused Dre (real name Andre Young) of assaulting her after Pump It Up had edited an N.W.A interview to include disparaging comments made by Ice Cube, who was embroiled in a feud with his former group at the time. The single was released by Ruffhouse Records, home to other artists such as Cypress Hill and Kris Kross, and became a worldwide underground hit in the clubs and hip hop circles. Two versions of a music video were released—the original version and a censored edition.
Penicillin on Wax included several additional "disses" aimed at both Compton artists and commercially successful artists such as Kid 'n Play and Kwamé. The intro used the same beat as N.W.A's Efil4zaggin album intro. Tim taunted, "I stole your beat and made it better, to show the whole world that you ain't nothing but a bunch of pussies," before a number of disparaging answering machine messages supported Tim's position as he rapped, "Wearing all that black, driving them cars, but you still look wack!" In another skit, "DJ Quik Beat Down," Tim Dog "physically assaulted" DJ Quik. Since the release, incoming responses came the following years from west coast artists Snoop Dogg, DJ Quik, Compton's Most Wanted, Penthouse Players Clique, Rodney O & Joe Cooley, and Tweedy Bird Loc.
Tim followed up with his second album Do or Die in 1993. The album represented Tim's shift of focus away from confrontation with the West Coast and instead concentrated on hardcore East Coast rap. The album contained a shout-out to Tupac Shakur whom Tim thanked for assisting him when involved in a potentially violent situation when touring in California.
In 1994, Tim Dog released the EP Bitch with a Perm. The second track, "Dog Baby", was another diss to Dr. Dre and Snoop Dogg.
Tim Dog moved to the UK in 1995 and worked with UK artist Apache Indian, producing the hit single "Make Way for the Indian". Tim then toured with Kool Keith and recorded several other tracks, including his August 2005 collaboration with Percee P, "NY to the UK."
Tim Dog had been the head of "Rap Legends Recordings" and previously co-founded Our Turn Records in Los Angeles with Eddie Pugh, President of Black Music Sony Records. Previously, he was the CEO President of Big Xity Entertainment based in New York and BMC Management based in Atlanta.


=== Legal issues and death ===
In 2011, Tim Dog pleaded guilty to grand larceny for conning a woman, Esther Pilgrim, out of $32,000 in an online dating scam. He was sentenced to five years' probation and ordered to pay restitution of $19,000 to Pilgrim. The case was featured on the June 15, 2012, episode of Dateline NBC, which clarified that it was a best interest plea (Alford plea) to theft.Tim Dog reportedly died of complications from diabetes on February 14, 2013. However, the funeral was canceled and no death certificate or autopsy existed. His family also stayed away from the media claiming religious reasons as a justification for their shunning of the press and wanting to mourn in private. After Pilgrim alleged in May 2013 that Tim Dog's "reported death" may have been a scheme by Tim Dog to avoid payments to her, she came public demanding further investigation about his death. A warrant was issued in Mississippi for his arrest in case he was still alive.On September 15, 2014, it was finally confirmed by NBC News that Tim Dog had indeed died on February 14, 2013, as had been initially reported. A death certificate was filed in Dekalb County, Georgia, putting an end to speculation that he was still alive and trying to avoid his court-mandated debts.


== Discography ==
1991: Penicillin on Wax
1993: Do or Die
1994: Bitch with a Perm (EP)
1996: Big Time (with Kool Keith as Ultra)
2003: Immortal
2006: BX Warrior
2009: Project X: Iconic (with Kool Keith)


== References ==


== External links ==
Tim Dog discography on DiscogsBernard Dolan (born March 8, 1981) is an American rapper, spoken word artist, activist, screenwriter, and composer based in Providence, Rhode Island.


== History ==
B. Dolan's first performances took place at New York City's Nuyorican Poets Cafe, where he gained respect as part of HBO's Def Poetry in 2002 and won numerous slam titles. He has since distanced himself from and criticized slam poetry. In 2011, he told the Boston Phoenix:Doing spoken word was the first time I ever tried to present my writing on a stage, and that's what it was good for.  It taught me some basic stage tricks that I still use — like how to change my voice and talk to a crowd. But once you've picked up those chops, you need to get the hell out before you become some asshole who wins the poetry slam for the 10th year in a row.
After performing at a Def Jam industry party at the Rush Arts Gallery, B. Dolan realized he wouldn't be able to work within the major label structure. Within months, he dropped out of welder's college, bought a drum machine, and began recording the first album The Failure. During this time, he slept on "park benches and subway trains" while working as a doorman at a building in close proximity to the Twin Towers. It was at this time that the September 11 attacks happened, leaving B. Dolan in a "paranoid mental state", which caused him to move back to Rhode Island.Once back in Rhode Island, B. Dolan tapped into the local arts community, volunteered for at-risk youth programs, created the consumer activist website Knowmore.org, teamed up with Sage Francis, signed to Strange Famous Records, and began to tour internationally since 2005.
B. Dolan has also remained prolific as a rapper, releasing albums on Strange Famous Records since 2008 and most notably creating the "Bombzo Way" and "Evel Knievel" characters, which make surprise guest appearances at his concerts. In 2010, he released his second album Fallen House, Sunken City, the entirety of which is produced by Alias of Anticon.In 2011, B. Dolan created the package show The Church of Love & Ruin, which combined activism and art by bringing openly LGBT and Queer performers into the arena of hip hop, in an attempt to address homophobia in rap.On July 10, 2015, B. Dolan released his third studio album, entitled Kill the Wolf, on Speech Development and Strange Famous Records. This was followed with a world tour, visiting the US, UK and Europe.


== Knowmore.org ==
As an activist, B. Dolan is known primarily as a co-founder of Knowmore.org, a wiki devoted to connecting consumers with social responsibility information about corporations. He is also an author of several articles within the website. He is especially known for an article on American Apparel's CEO Dov Charney. In 2008, due to a lack of workers and funds, Dolan decided to take the site down. Recently in 2016, he has started a funding page to redesign the site and get it up and running again.[1]


== Film work ==
B. Dolan co-wrote, appeared briefly in, and composed music for the 2015 independent horror film Almost Mercy, directed and co-written by Tom DeNucci. He subsequently co-wrote and composed the score for the 2019 crime-thriller Vault, also directed and co-written by DeNucci.


== Discography ==
Studio albums

The Failure (2003) [reissued via Strange Famous, 2007]
Fallen House, Sunken City (Strange Famous, 2010) (produced by Alias)
Kill the Wolf (Strange Famous, 2015)
This Was Supposed to Be Fun (Strange Famous, 2019) (with Sage Francis, as Epic Beard Men)
The Wound Is Not the Body (2024)EPs

Live Evel (2008)
Season 1 (2018) (with Sage Francis, as Epic Beard Men)Mixtapes

House of Bees Vol. 1 (2009) (with Buddy Peace)
House of Bees Vol. 2 (2012) (with Buddy Peace)
House of Bees Vol. 3 (2015) (with Buddy Peace)
Unjustified: Man of the Peckerwoods (2018)Film scores

The Vault (2021)Remix albums

F.H.S.C. Remixes: Desert Sessions (Strange Famous, 2013) (with Buddy Peace)
Kill the Wolf Remix LP (Strange Famous, 2021) (with Buddy Peace)
Fused: Selected Remixes from the Discord Community (2022)Live albums

Antiquiet Sessions #24 (2015) [EP]
We Show Up: Live Recordings 2013-2015 (2016)Guest appearances

Sage Francis - "Broccilude" & "High Step" on Human the Death Dance (2007)
Prolyphic & Reanimator - "Survived Another Winter" on The Ugly Truth (2008)
Sage Francis - "House of Bees", "Sea Legs" & "SFR Pays Dues" on Sick of Wasting (2009)
Sole - "Fuck Wells Fargo" on Nuclear Winter Volume 2: Death Panel (2011)
Scroobius Pip - "Soldier Boy (Kill 'Em)" on Distraction Pieces (2011)
Dan le sac - "Caretaker" and "Good Time Gang War" on Space Between the Words (2012)
Sage Francis - "You Can't Win" from Sick To D(eat)h (2013)


== Filmography ==
Almost Mercy (2015) - screenwriter, composer, actor
Vault (2019) - screenwriter, composer


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Knowmore.org
B. Dolan on Strange Famous RecordsLe'Quincy Anderson (born April 28, 1990), better known by his stage name Don Q, is an American rapper. He is best known for his collaborations with labelmate A Boogie wit da Hoodie.


== Early life ==
Le'Quincy Anderson was born and raised in the Bronx in New York City. He began writing raps in the 5th grade but did not start taking rap seriously until high school, he first rapped in a booth at the age of 16. Don grew up listening to artists such as Cassidy, Fabolous, Jadakiss, Styles P, Lloyd Banks and Jay-Z.As he got older he began battle rapping in the streets, parks, and different blocks which helped him build confidence. Don began battling because he was inspired by the Smack DVD series. Don's first stage name was Q da Don, he would then change it to Don Q, after the popular rum after seeing it on the shelves at local liquor stores. Don released his first mixtape at 17. The mixtape was in dedication to Andre "Pop" Davidson, a standout basketball player at John F. Kennedy High School who died. Pop was Don's best friend and the first person to co-sign Don's rapping talent. The mixtape, however, did not receive much traction outside of Highbridge. Don almost quit rapping losing motivation as he did not have money to pay for studio sessions. Don was still worried about continuing his school studies and the streets but he came to the conclusion that rap was going to be his way to a better life. He made appearances in the local battle circuit where he rapped for several leagues such as Battle On The Beat, Blue Collar Television and Come Up Groundz.


== Career ==


=== 2016: Career beginnings ===
In 2016, Don signed to Highbridge the Label, a label ran by friends Quincy "QP" Acheampong and Sambou "Bubba" Camara. He and A Boogie were the first artists signed to the label. He was heavily featured on the compilation, Highbridge the Label: The Takeover Vol. 1, which dropped on May 28, 2016. Don gained more notoriety after appearing on Funkmaster Flex's freestyle series on Hot 97, along with A Boogie wit da Hoodie who had become one of the most popular up and coming rappers in New York City. Don delivered an impressive freestyle over Nas' Oochie Wally. Soon, the songs Bando and Bag On Me, featuring Don Q began getting radio play in the Tri-State area. In July 2016, Highbridge the Label partnered with Atlantic Records. Don dropped his first official mixtape in August 2016. The mixtape titled Don Season was hosted by DJ Don Cannon. The mixtape has features from A Boogie, PnB Rock and Keir. In September 2016, he was featured on the BET Hip Hop Awards cypher alongside A Boogie wit da Hoodie, Russ, Kent Jones and Nick Grant. During the year, Don collaborated with artists like Meek Mill, Dave East, Fabolous, Young Scooter and PnB Rock among others.


=== 2017 ===
In 2017, Don dropped his second mixtape titled Corner Stories featuring Dave East, A Boogie, Jadakiss, Styles P, Zoey Dollaz, PnB Rock, Fabolous and Loso Loaded, he would later follow up with a remastered version titled Corner Stories Reloaded with extra songs adding one featuring Rowdy Rebel. Don is featured on A Boogie's debut album The Bigger Artist on the tracks "Somebody" and "Money Sprung". Don collaborated with Dominican recording artist Chimbala, on a track titled Matalo. Don Q released his mixtape Don Talk featuring Pusha T, Tee Grizzley and Desiigner.


=== 2018 ===
Don Q released his follow-up mixtape to Don Season titled Don Season 2 featuring G Herbo, Dave East, Lil Durk, Moneybagg Yo and more. The lead single for the project is titled "Yeah Yeah" and features A Boogie wit da Hoodie and 50 Cent and produced by Murda Beatz. Don Q closed out the year dropping a 6 song extended play titled Underrated. He was also featured on A-Boogie's Platinum album, Hoodie SZN on a collaboration titled "Bosses and Workers" with fellow labelmate Trap Manny.


=== 2019 ===
To start off 2019, Don responded to Tory Lanez's battle challenge. Lanez had engaged in a battle with Joyner Lucas and had proclaimed himself the best rapper alive. Don proclaimed that Tory could not be the best rapper alive as he accused him of stealing lyrics from his Hot 97 freestyle. After a brief exchange of words via social media, Don released a diss track titled, "I'm Not Joyner." Lanez responded with his own diss entitled "Don Queen". The following day, Don Q retaliated with another diss track, called "This Is Ya King?"Don Q was one of 5 rappers banned from New York City's Rolling Loud festival due to safety concerns by the NYPD.


=== 2020 ===
With a short hiatus from music, Don Q returned to music by releasing "Flood My Wrist" featuring Lil Uzi Vert and A Boogie wit da Hoodie on July 1, 2020. He went on to release "I'm the One" a week later, and "Blood Sweat & Tears" on July 24. Another A Boogie-collaboration, "Vroom Vroom", was released on September 2, 2020.


=== 2021 ===
After another long hiatus, Don Q made his departure from Atlantic Records and signed a new record deal with record label EMPIRE. Don Q a released mixtape called 'Double or Nothing' on October 22, 2021, featuring a song with American drill rapper B-Lovee.


== Personal life ==
Don has one daughter.


== Discography ==


=== Commercial mixtapes ===


=== Mixtapes ===


=== Extended plays ===


=== Singles ===


==== As lead artist ====


=== As A Featured Artist ===


== Notes ==


== References ==Daniel Dumile ( DOO-mə-lay; July 13, 1971 – October 31, 2020), best known by his stage name MF Doom or simply Doom (both stylized in all caps), was a British-American  rapper and record producer. Noted for his intricate wordplay, signature metal mask, and "supervillain" stage persona, Dumile became a major figure of underground hip hop and alternative hip hop in the 2000s. After his death, Variety described him as one of the scene's "most celebrated, unpredictable and enigmatic figures".Dumile was born in London and moved to Long Island, New York, at a young age. He began his career in 1988 as a member of the trio KMD, performing as Zev Love X. The group disbanded in 1993 after the death of member DJ Subroc, Dumile's brother. After a hiatus, Dumile reemerged in the late 1990s. He began performing at open mic events while wearing a metal mask resembling that of the Marvel Comics supervillain Doctor Doom, who is depicted on the cover of his 1999 debut solo album Operation: Doomsday. He adopted the MF Doom persona and rarely made unmasked public appearances thereafter.
During Dumile's most prolific period, the early to mid-2000s, he released the acclaimed Mm..Food (2004) as MF Doom, as well as albums released under the pseudonyms King Geedorah and Viktor Vaughn. Madvillainy (2004), recorded with the producer Madlib under the name Madvillain, is often cited as Dumile's magnum opus and is regarded as a landmark album in hip hop. Madvilliany was followed by another acclaimed collaboration, The Mouse and the Mask (2005), with the producer Danger Mouse, released under the name Danger Doom.
Though he lived the majority of his life in the United States, Dumile never gained American citizenship. In 2010, he was denied reentry after returning from an international tour for his sixth and final solo album, Born Like This (2009). He relocated to London and, in his final years, worked mostly in collaboration with other artists, releasing albums with Jneiro Jarel (as JJ Doom), Bishop Nehru (NehruvianDoom), and Czarface (Czarface Meets Metal Face and the posthumous Super What?). Dumile died in 2020 from angioedema following a reaction to a blood pressure medication.


== Early life ==
Dumile was born in Hounslow, London, on July 13, 1971, the son of a Trinidadian mother and Zimbabwean father. He was the eldest of five children. According to Dumile, he was conceived in the United States, and happened to be born in London because his mother was visiting family. As a child, Dumile moved with his family to Long Island, New York, and grew up in Long Beach on Long Island. He said he had no memory of his London childhood and his parents had no affiliation with British culture. However, he remained a British citizen, never gaining American citizenship.Dumile began DJing during the summer after third grade. As a child, he was a fan and collector of comic books and earned the nickname "Doom" (a phonetic play on the name Dumile) among friends and family.


== Career ==


=== 1988–1997: KMD, Subroc's death, and hiatus ===
As Zev Love X, Dumile formed the hip hop group KMD in 1988 with his younger brother DJ Subroc and Rodan, who was later replaced by Onyx the Birthstone Kid. A&R representative Dante Ross learned of KMD through the hip hop group 3rd Bass and signed them to Elektra Records. Their recording debut came on 3rd Bass's song "The Gas Face" on The Cactus Album, followed in 1991 by their debut album Mr. Hood. Dumile performed the last verse on "The Gas Face"; according to Pete Nice's verse on the track, Dumile created the phrase.On April 23, 1993, just before the release of the second KMD album, Black Bastards, Subroc was struck by a car and killed while crossing the Long Island Expressway. Dumile completed the album alone over the course of several months, and it was announced with a release date of May 3, 1994. KMD was dropped by Elektra and the album went unreleased due to its controversial cover art, which featured a cartoon of a stereotypical pickaninny or sambo character being hanged.After his brother's death, Dumile retreated from the hip hop scene from 1994 to 1997, living "damn near homeless, walking the streets of Manhattan, sleeping on benches". In the late 1990s, he settled in Atlanta; he had moved to Georgia in the mid-90s. According to interviews with Dumile, he was "recovering from his wounds" and swearing revenge "against the industry that so badly deformed him". Black Bastards had been bootlegged by that time, but was not officially released until 2000.


=== 1997–2001: Operation: Doomsday and production work ===
In 1997 or 1998, Dumile began freestyling incognito at open-mic events at the Nuyorican Poets Café in Manhattan, obscuring his face by putting tights over his head. He turned this into a new identity, MF Doom, with a mask similar to that of Marvel Comics supervillain Doctor Doom. He later used a mask based on the character Maximus from the 2000 film Gladiator.Bobbito Garcia's Fondle 'Em Records released Operation: Doomsday, Dumile's first full-length LP as MF Doom, in 1999. Dumile's collaborators on Operation: Doomsday included fellow members of the Monsta Island Czars collective, for which each artist took on the persona of a monster from the Godzilla films. Dumile went by the alias "King Geedorah", a three-headed golden dragon space monster modeled after King Ghidorah. The album's productions sampled cartoons including Fantastic Four. Jon Caramanica, in a review of Operation: Doomsday for Spin, emphasized the contrast between Dumile's flow as Zev Love X in KMD and his revised approach as a solo artist: "Doom's flow is muddy, nowhere near the sprightly rhymes of KMD's early days, and his thought process is haphazard." Caramanica revisited Operation: Doomsday in The New York Times in 2021, calling it "one of the most idiosyncratic hip-hop albums of the 1990s, and one of the defining documents of the independent hip-hop explosion of that decade". Cyril Cordor, in a review for AllMusic, described Operation: Doomsday as Dumile's "rawest" lyrical effort.In 2001, Dumile began releasing his Special Herbs instrumentals series under the pseudonym Metal Fingers. In a review of a 2011 box set containing ten volumes of the Special Herbs series, Pitchfork observed that the instrumentals stand on their own without vocal tracks: "most of these tracks sound plenty 'finished' even in rhyme-less form".


=== 2002–2004: King Geedorah, Viktor Vaughn, and Madvillainy ===
In 2003, Dumile released the album Take Me to Your Leader under his King Geedorah moniker. In Pitchfork, Mark Martelli described Take Me to Your Leader as close to a concept album, noting how it lays out the "mythos" of the eponymous King Geedorah. Martelli praised the album, particularly tracks such as "One Smart Nigger" which, in his view, were superior to other artists' attempts at political hip hop. Fact, in a brief notice for a 2013 reissue of Take Me to Your Leader, called it "arguably the most cinematic" of Dumile's albums from the turn of the 21st century.Later in 2003, Dumile released the LP Vaudeville Villain under the moniker Viktor Vaughn (another play on Doctor Doom, who is also known as Victor von Doom). NME described the Viktor Vaughn persona as "a time travelling street hustler". Pitchfork named Vaudeville Villain the week's best new album and highlighted its lyricism, writing that Dumile was one of the best writers in rap.Dumile's breakthrough came in 2004 with the album Madvillainy, created with producer Madlib under the group name Madvillain. They recorded the album in a series of sessions over two years before a commercial release on March 23, 2004. Madvillainy was a critical and commercial success, and has since become known as Dumile's masterpiece.Also in 2004, Dumile released VV:2, a follow-up LP under the Viktor Vaughn moniker. Nathan Rabin noted in The A.V. Club that VV:2, coming as it did after the commercial and critical success of Madvillainy, represented an unusual career choice for Dumile whereby he went "deeper underground" instead of embracing wider fame.Later in 2004, the second MF Doom album Mm..Food was released by Rhymesayers Entertainment. Pitchfork gave the album a positive review. Nathan Rabin described it as a "crazy pastiche" but argued that it grew more coherent on repeated listening.


=== 2005–2009: Danger Doom, Born Like This, and Ghostface collaboration ===
Although still an independent artist, Dumile took a bigger step towards the mainstream in 2005 with The Mouse and the Mask, a collaboration with the producer DJ Danger Mouse under the group name Danger Doom. The album, released on October 11, 2005, by Epitaph and Lex, was developed in collaboration with Cartoon Network's Adult Swim and featured voice actors and characters from its programs (mostly Aqua Teen Hunger Force). The Mouse and the Mask reached #41 on the Billboard 200. Critic Chris Vognar, discussing the role of comedy in hip hop, argued that "Doom and Danger exemplify an absurdist strain in recent independent hip-hop, a willingness to embrace the nerdy without a heavy cloak of irony".  In the same year, Dumile appeared on the second Gorillaz album, Demon Days.Dumile produced tracks for both of Ghostface Killah's 2006 albums Fishscale and More Fish. In February 2013, Ghostface Killah said that he and Dumile were in the process of choosing tracks for a collaborative album. In 2015, Ghostface Killah announced that the album, Swift & Changeable, would be released in 2016, and later posted promotional artwork for the collaboration. It remains unreleased.
Dumile's Born Like This was released on Lex Records on March 24, 2009. The album was Dumile's first solo album to chart in the US. In a largely favorable review for Pitchfork, Nate Patrin cast the album as a return to form for Dumile, following a period of limited output. He observed that Dumile's lyrics and flow—"a focused rasp that's subtly grown slightly more ragged and intense"—were darker than on earlier records. He also highlighted the overtly homophobic "Batty Boyz", a diss track against unnamed rappers. Steve Yates, reviewing the album in The Guardian, likewise saw Born Like This as hearkening back to Dumile's earlier output.  Yates felt it presented Dumile at "his scalpel-tongued, scatter-mouthed best". Both Patrin and Yates noted the influence of Charles Bukowski on Born Like This: the first line of Bukowski's poem "Dinosauria, We" gives the album its title.


=== 2010–2021: Move to London and later collaborations ===
In early 2010, Dumile released the EP Gazzillion Ear on Lex, a compilation of remixes of "Gazzillion Ear" from Born Like This, including a remix by Thom Yorke and two mixes by Jneiro Jarel. A further remix by Madvillain featuring a voicemail message from Kanye West was released online. The EP coincided with Dumile's first performances outside North America. On March 5, 2010, Lex and Sónar presented the first Doom show in London, at the Roundhouse in Camden. Expektoration, Dumile's second live album, was released on September 14, 2010, through Gold Dust. In a review of Expektoration, Pitchfork noted that Dumile's vocal performance was more energetic than on his recordings, which it characterized as "laidback" by comparison.After completing his European tour, Dumile was refused re-entry into the United States. He settled in the UK in 2010. Key to the Kuffs, an album Dumile made in collaboration with the producer Jneiro Jarel as JJ Doom, was released on August 20, 2012, and included guest features from Damon Albarn, Beth Gibbons of Portishead, Khujo Goodie of Goodie Mob and Dungeon Family, and Boston Fielder. Reviews of Key to the Kuffs in Pitchfork and Fact emphasized its references to Dumile's "exile" in the United Kingdom, while Resident Advisor noted its play on Britishisms in tracks like "Guv'nor".NehruvianDoom, Dumile's collaboration with the rapper Bishop Nehru, was released on October 7, 2014. Dumile produced all the tracks on NehruvianDoom, often using beats developed in the Special Herbs series; vocals are primarily Nehru's, with some contributions from Dumile. The album was Nehru's major label debut. The limitations of Nehru's artistic achievement on the album were stressed by critics due to his relative youth (he was still in his teens when the album was produced) and the album's briefness, lasting just over 30 minutes. Dumile's contributions were also seen as limited: Pitchfork wrote that he often seemed on "autopilot", and XXL suggested that neither he nor Nehru were able to "push the envelope".In August 2017, Adult Swim announced a Doom compilation, The Missing Notebook Rhymes, that would consist of songs from his upcoming projects and featured appearances on other artists' songs. The Adult Swim website was to release one new song per week over the course of 15 weeks. However, the arrangement was canceled in September after the release of only seven tracks.In February 2018, Dumile and Czarface released "Nautical Depth", the first single from their collaborative album Czarface Meets Metal Face. The album was released on March 30, 2018. In a lukewarm review for Pitchfork, Mehan Jayasuriya compared verses by Open Mike Eagle favorably to Dumile's, but noted that Dumile's contribution to "Nautical Depth" exhibited his "once razor-sharp lyricism". Ben Beaumont-Thomas, in The Guardian, was more positive, noting Dumile's "stoner surrealism" in "Captain Crunch".Aside from the album with Czarface, Dumile's musical output in the final three years of his life was limited to one-off guest appearances on other artists' tracks. Posthumous releases included appearances on two songs for the video game Grand Theft Auto Online: "Lunch Break", with Flying Lotus; and "The Chocolate Conquistadors", with BadBadNotGood, made for the game's content update The Cayo Perico Heist. Shortly after Dumile's death was announced, Flying Lotus revealed that they had been working on an EP. Having been completed in early 2020 but later delayed due to the COVID-19 pandemic, Dumile's second collaborative album with Czarface and first posthumous release, Super What?, was released in May 2021.


== Style and artistry ==
Dumile's lyrics are known for wordplay. Bradley and DuBois, describing Dumile as "among the most enigmatic figures in hip-hop", wrote that Dumile's "raspy baritone weaves an intricate web of allusions drawn from comic books and metaphysics along with seeming nonsense and non sequiturs". According to an obituary in The Ringer, his flow was "loose and conversational, but delivered with technical precision", and his use of rhyme and meter eclipsed that of Big Pun and Eminem.Dumile's production work frequently incorporated samples and quotations from film. A review of Special Herbs volumes 5 and 6 in CMJ New Music Monthly compared Dumile's beats to "soul jazz".


=== MF Doom persona ===
Dumile created the MF Doom character as an alter ego with a backstory he could reference in his music. The character combines elements from the Marvel Comics supervillain Doctor Doom, Destro, and the Phantom of the Opera; like Doctor Doom and Phantom, Dumile referred to himself in the third person while in character. His signature mask was similar to that of Doctor Doom, who is depicted rapping on the cover of Dumile's 1999 debut album Operation: Doomsday.Dumile wore the mask while performing, and would not be photographed without it, except for short glimpses in videos and in earlier photos with KMD. Later versions of the mask were based on a prop from the 2000 film Gladiator. Academic Hershini Bhana Young argued that, by appropriating the Doctor Doom mask, Dumile "positions himself as enemy, not only of the music industry but also of dominant constructions of identity that relegate him as a black man to second-class citizenship".Dumile sometimes sent stand-ins to perform in the mask, which he saw as a "logical extension" of the concept but angered audiences. Dumile initially claimed that he had lost weight and thus looked and sounded different. At a 2010 show in Toronto, an imposter was booed off stage before being replaced by Dumile. In an interview with The New Yorker, Dumile described himself as the "writer and director" of the character and that he "might send a white dude next ... Whoever plays the character plays the character."In November 2019, during his performance at the Adult Swim Festival, the electronic artist Flying Lotus announced that he would be joined onstage by Dumile. Instead, the masked figure who appeared on stage was revealed as the comedian Hannibal Buress. Dumile's involvement in the prank has not been confirmed.


== Legacy and influence ==
Dumile was celebrated in independent hip hop. After his death, the producer Flying Lotus wrote of Madvillainy: "All u ever needed in hip-hop was this record. Sorted. Done. Give it to the fucking aliens." The English musician Thom Yorke, who twice collaborated with Dumile, wrote: "He was a massive inspiration to so many of us, changed things... For me the way he put words was often shocking in its genius, using stream of consciousness in a way I'd never heard before." Stereogum, reviewing Operation: Doomsday on its 20th anniversary, noted Dumile's "formative" influence on younger rappers. El-P of Run the Jewels described him as a "writer's writer", while Q-Tip called him "your favorite rapper's favorite rapper".


== Personal life ==
Dumile was married to Jasmine Dumile for an unknown period until his death in October 2020. The couple had five children. Dumile's son Malachi died at the age of 14 from unspecified causes in late 2017.


=== Religion ===
Dumile's worldview was informed by Islam and the Afrocentrism espoused by African-American Muslims. His parents raised him and his brother as Muslims in the Five-Percent Nation, a religious black nationalist movement influenced by Islam. Dumile's father taught him about pan-African history, including historical figures such as Marcus Garvey and Elijah Muhammad—lessons that he then strove to impart upon his peers.By the early 1990s, Dumile and the other members of KMD identified as a member of the Ansaar Allah Community, later known as the Nuwaubian Nation. In their music, the members of KMD professed a religious message based on tenets of Nuwaubianism, which Dumile distinguished from Five-Percent beliefs in an early interview. In the music video for "Peachfuzz", Dumile and the other members of KMD wear kufi caps. By 2000, though he was no longer as strictly observant, Dumile still participated in Nuwaubian events such as the Savior's Day celebration at the Tama-Re compound in Georgia and held a positive opinion of the community.


=== Citizenship ===
Although Dumile lived in the United States for most of his life, he never became a naturalized citizen. He acquired a British passport prior to his 2010 European tour; after completing the tour later that year, he was refused re-entry to the United States. The European tour was only his second international tour, and he had previously avoided leaving the United States; he had believed he would be able to secure reentry based on his long-term residency and family connections.The denial of reentry forced Dumile apart from his wife and children, and for nearly two years he saw them only via video calls or during their brief visits to the United Kingdom. They were reunited when his family moved to London in 2012. That year, Dumile said he was "done with the United States". At the time of his death, he was living in Leeds.


== Death ==
In October 2020, Dumile was admitted to St James's University Hospital in Leeds, England, after suffering respiratory problems. On October 31,  he died from angioedema, a rare reaction to a blood pressure medication he had been recently prescribed. He had suffered from high blood pressure and kidney disease. Due to the COVID-19 lockdown, Dumile's wife, Jasmine, was not allowed to visit him in the hospital until the day of his death. Jasmine announced Dumile's death on December 31, 2020. The cause of death was not announced until July 2023.Many musicians made tributes to Dumile. Dumile's 2004 instrumental track "Coffin Nails" was included on U.S. President Joe Biden's inauguration playlist. The decision was criticized by some of Dumile's fans, as Biden was part of the Obama administration, which had barred him from returning to the United States.


== Selected discography ==


=== Solo albums ===
Operation: Doomsday (1999)
Take Me to Your Leader (2003, as King Geedorah)
Vaudeville Villain (2003, as Viktor Vaughn)
VV:2 (2004, as Viktor Vaughn)
Mm..Food (2004)
Born Like This (2009, as Doom)


=== Collaborative albums ===
Mr. Hood (1991, as Zev Love X with KMD)
Black Bastards (2000, as Zev Love X with KMD)
Madvillainy (2004, with Madlib as Madvillain)
Special Herbs + Spices Volume 1 (2004, with MF Grimm)
The Mouse and the Mask (2005, with Danger Mouse as Danger Doom)
Key to the Kuffs (2012, with Jneiro Jarel as JJ Doom)
NehruvianDoom (2014, with Bishop Nehru as NehruvianDoom)
Czarface Meets Metal Face (2018, with Czarface)
Super What? (2021, with Czarface)


== Footnotes ==


== References ==


=== Sources ===
Bradley, Adam; DuBois, Andrew Lee, eds. (2010). The Anthology of Rap. Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-14190-0. OCLC 601348010.
Hsu, Hua (March 2005). "The Mask of Sorrow". The Wire. No. 253. pp. 44–49 – via Exact Editions (subscription required).
Pappademas, Alex (December 2004). "Imminent Doom". Spin. Vol. 20, no. 12. pp. 94–97 – via Google Books.
Young, Hershini Bhana (2014). "Twenty-First-Century Post-Humans: The Rise of the See-J". In DeFrantz, Thomas F.; Gonzalez, Anita (eds.). Black Performance Theory. Duke University Press. doi:10.1215/9780822377016. ISBN 978-0-8223-5607-3. JSTOR j.ctv11cvzpk.
Vognar, Chris (2011). "This Ain't Funny So Don't You Dare Laugh". Transition. Indiana University Press (104): 102–120. doi:10.2979/transition.2011.-.104.102.
Wilder, Chris (August 1991). "'I'm is a God'". The Source. No. 23. pp. 36–37. Archived from the original on January 2, 2021 – via babylonfalling.com.


== Further reading ==
Allen, Ryan (2006). "MF Doom". In Pilchak, Angela M. (ed.). Contemporary Musicians. Vol. 54. Thomson Gale. pp. 141–143. ISBN 978-1-4144-0557-5. OCLC 728679037.
Callahan-Bever, Noah (January 9, 2012). "International God of Mystery: An M.F.'n Look Back With M.F. Doom". Ego Trip. 12. Archived from the original on February 1, 2012.
Hess, Mickey (July 2005). "Metal Faces, Rap Masks: Identity and Resistance in Hip Hop's Persona Artist". Popular Music and Society. Routledge. 28 (3): 297–311. doi:10.1080/03007760500105149. S2CID 191570328.
—————— (2007). "The Rap Persona". Is Hip Hop Dead? The Past, Present, and Future of America's Most Wanted Music. Praeger. pp. 69–88. ISBN 978-1-56720-721-7. OCLC 181163529 – via the Internet Archive.
Levine, Mike (September 3, 2014). "MF Doom [Dumile, Daniel]". Grove Music Online. Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/gmo/9781561592630.article.A2267192.
Ramirez, J. Jesse (December 28, 2020). "Keeping It Unreal: Rap, Racecraft, and MF Doom". Humanities. MDPI. 10 (5): 5. doi:10.3390/h10010005.
Westhoff, Ben (November 8, 2006). "Private Enemy". The Village Voice. pp. 14–16, 18, 20, 22, 24, 26. ProQuest 232270364.


== External links ==
Official website 
MF Doom at AllMusic 
MF Doom discography at Discogs 
2aa5bd46-43ba-4a09-9c7e-20b07036db51, 21cb44eb-3f6b-4f55-9a0d-c36a517f8d36, ec7d20eb-769d-4e50-be80-175e370155cf, 343ce4fa-54b3-47b8-bd27-b379cf50f7ff, 2a827687-f114-46fe-9e5d-74acb7d33995, 52ebcc60-2bd9-47c6-8150-fe668ace76e1 MF Doom discography at MusicBrainz 
MF Doom on SoundCloud 
MF Doom on TwitterOladipo Omishore, known professionally as Dot da Genius, is an American Nigerian record producer and audio engineer from Brooklyn, New York. He first gained recognition in 2008 for producing "Day 'n' Nite" by American musician Kid Cudi, with whom he is a longtime friend and frequent collaborator; the two would later form a rock band in 2010, known as WZRD.Engaged in various entrepreneurial pursuits, Omishore launched his own trans-media company HeadBanga Muzik Group which has collaborated with numerous brands and labels, such as: Universal Music Group, BMG, Nike, and Splice. His production has been featured on albums by several prominent artists in the music industry, including Nas, Kanye West, Eminem, Denzel Curry, Lil Nas X, JID, 6LACK, and Jhené Aiko, among others.


== Life and career ==


=== 1986–2005: Early life ===
Oladipo Omishore is from the Brooklyn borough of New York City. He is of Nigerian heritage, of the Yoruba tribe. His parents always encouraged his interest in music, and at the age of seven, his father sent him to the Brooklyn Music School for piano lessons, where he studied with Tom Coote. Omishore preferred playing the guitar, but learning how to play a keyboard instrument was very beneficial later in life when he started producing. He attended Polytechnic Institute of New York University in New York, where he studied electrical engineering and graduated in 2009.


=== 2006–2009: Career beginnings and producing for Kid Cudi ===
Omishore began his career in sound-mixing in 2003 at New York University by using Image-Line's FL Studio program. In 2004, Omishore created a studio in his basement with equipment bought by his parents and would later call it "Head Banga Muzik Studios." After gaining attention for his production, he decided to change locations to the Brewery Recording Studio. In May 2009, Da Genius partnered up with Andrew Krivonos, owner of Brewery Recording Studio, and helped move the studio to North Brooklyn in a new facility.Omishore and Kid Cudi met in 2006, and they lived together for two years. Both artists found a genuine liking for one another, and chose to work with each other on several music productions. "Day N' Nite" turned out to be the biggest hit production that both of them worked on together, with Omishore providing the beats and Cudi rapping and singing over the music. He produced the song in Head Banga Muzik Studios, and used several different methods of mixing and synthesizing the beats on this track. The song took a total of two days to complete, from the instrumental being made to the track's final arrangements. No edits were made after that two-day process ended. It was finished in 2007 and became popular two years later, in 2009.
"Day N' Nite" reached the top three in the United States and the United Kingdom. It was released under the labels GOOD Music, Fool's Gold Records, Universal Motown Records, and Data Records. It is featured on the album Man on the Moon: The End of Day.


=== 2010–2018: WZRD ===

WZRD is Omishore and Kid Cudi's collaboration alternative rock band. Kid Cudi focuses on the vocals, while Omishore is responsible for the production. Together, they produced a self-made album titled WZRD. Much of their inspiration behind the album came from their love for Nirvana, The Pixies, and Pink Floyd. They recorded much of the album in either their tour bus while they were on the road, or Cudi's basement studio in Hollywood Hills. This album contained absolutely no profanity, including the "n word" that many rappers loosely use. The album was first released on February 28, 2012. It reportedly sold 70,499 copies in its opening week. Although Cudi finds the marketing and promotion of the album weak by Universal Music Group, it landed the number three spot on the album sales chart. Universal Music Group also allegedly under-shipped copies of the album. While "Dose of Dopeness" was released prior to the release of WZRD, it was not featured on the album.


=== 2018–present: Solo debut album ===
In 2018, Omishore and Woodro Skillson announced the signing of James Japan to their label, HeadBanga Muzik Group.In 2020, Omishore scored his first number-one hit single on the Billboard Hot 100, when "The Scotts," a collaborative effort between Cudi and his protege Travis Scott, debuted at the top spot in the US chart.
On June 24, 2022, Omishore released "Talk About Me", the lead single from his upcoming solo debut album. The song features vocals from American rappers Kid Cudi, Denzel Curry, and JID. In July 2022, Complex interviewed Omishore on his upcoming debut album.


== Artistry ==


=== Musical style ===
Omishore is a self-taught music producer and engineer.


=== Influences ===
Among Omishore’s favorite albums of all time are Pink Floyd's The Dark Side of the Moon, Dr. Dre's The Chronic, Outkast's ATLiens, and Coldplay's Viva la Vida or Death and All His Friends.


== Personal life ==
Omishore has one daughter, from a previous relationship. In September 2014, American singer-songwriter Jhené Aiko, revealed she and Omishore were in a relationship. The two revealed their marriage in March 2016. On August 9, 2016, Jhené Aiko filed for divorce citing irreconcilable differences. The divorce was finalized in October 2017.


== Discography ==


=== Soundtrack albums ===


=== Singles ===


=== Guest appearances ===


== Production discography ==


== Awards and nominations ==


=== BET Hip Hop Awards ===


=== Black Reel Television Awards ===


=== Grammy Awards ===


=== MTV Video Music Awards ===


=== mtvU Woodie Awards ===


== Filmography ==
A Man Named Scott (2021) - Himself


== References ==


== External links ==
Dot Da Genius at AllMusic
Dot Da Genius discography at Discogs
Dot da Genius on MyspaceMelvin Jason Smalls, known professionally as Drag-On, is an American rapper. He is best known for his time on Ruff Ryders, through whom he released his debut album, Opposite of H2O (2000). The album was successful, debuting at number five on the US Billboard 200 chart and eventually sold over 500,000 copies and earning a Gold certification from the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). Drag-On released his second album Hell and Back, in 2004.
Drag-On has appeared in the 2001 film Exit Wounds and the 2003 Cradle 2 the Grave, both of which stars his then-Ruff Ryders label-mate DMX.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===


=== Singles ===


==== As lead artist ====


=== Guest appearances ===


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Drag-On at AllMusic
Drag-On at IMDbTyree Cinque Simmons (born April 22, 1978), known professionally as DJ Drama, is an American disc jockey (DJ), record executive and music promoter. He initially gained recognition as the official DJ for Atlanta-based rapper T.I. and would continue to gain prominence hosting mixtapes, namely his trademark Gangsta Grillz series. The branding has since been utilized by artists  of whom released projects compiled by Drama, including Lil Wayne, Tyler the Creator, Snoop Dogg, Yo Gotti, YoungBoy Never Broke Again, Fabolous, Jeezy, Meek Mill, and Gucci Mane, among others. He is also a co-founder of the record label Generation Now, an imprint of Atlantic Records which signed artists including Lil Uzi Vert and Jack Harlow.
As a non-performing hip hop artist, Drama's extensive network in the industry enables his records to enlist both underground and high-profile artists to perform lyrics or production. He's released five studio albums: Gangsta Grillz: The Album (2007) and Vol. 2 (2009), Third Power (2009), Quality Street Music (2012), Quality Street Music 2 (2016), and I'm Really Like That (2023). Drama has been named "DJ of the Year" in the 2013 BET Hip Hop Awards, and was awarded a Grammy Award for his work on Call Me If You Get Lost (2021).


== Early life and education ==
Tyree Simmons was born in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania and raised largely in Germantown, Philadelphia. At age 13, his sister took him to New York City where he purchased his first mixtape. He began making his own tapes soon after, including one titled Illadelph which featured artists like Black Thought, Dice Raw, Malik B., and others. He also started experimenting with turntables. Simmons attended Central High School in Philadelphia and graduated in 1996.After high school, he moved to Atlanta to attend Clark Atlanta University (CAU) where he studied mass communication. While there, he met two other Philadelphia-raised DJs: DJ Sense and Don Cannon. The three would eventually form the Aphilliates DJ and artist collective. During his studies, Simmons began making and releasing mixtapes under the moniker, DJ Drama. One of his first series (called Electric Relaxation) included a variety of R&B tracks. In 1998, he released his first mixtape (Jim Crow Laws) composed exclusively of Southern hip hop acts like Outkast, Three 6 Mafia, and Mystikal. The success of that tape led DJ Drama to start the mixtape series, Gangsta Grillz. He would go on to graduate from CAU in 2000.


== Career ==


=== 2003–2010: Career beginnings and Gangsta Grillz: The Album series ===
DJ Drama, alongside Don Cannon and DJ Sense, officially founded the Aphilliates Music Group (AMG) in 2003. The group distributed DJ Drama's Gangsta Grillz mixtape series, which saw early successes with T.I.'s Down With the King (2004) and Jeezy's Trap or Die (2005). By 2005, Drama and his AMG cohorts were hosting radio shows on Atlanta's Hot 107.9 and on Eminem's Shade 45 channel on Sirius Satellite Radio. In late 2005, Drama produced and hosted Lil Wayne's The Dedication mixtape, which would spawn a long series of Dedication tapes. Dedication 2, released in May 2006, appeared on the Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums chart and was labeled by The New York Times as "one of the 10 best recordings of 2006."AMG signed a joint venture deal with Asylum Records in September 2006. The first artist signed was American rapper Willie the Kid. In January 2007, AMG's Atlanta studios were raided by Fulton County police officers, who seized over 80,000 mixtapes, 4 vehicles, and some recording equipment. Both DJ Drama and Don Cannon were taken into custody on RICO charges. Hard drives containing tracks from Drama's first "official" album, Gangsta Grillz: The Album, were also seized despite the fact that the album was due to be released "above-board" by Grand Hustle Records via Atlantic Records. No further legal action was ever taken against Drama or Cannon in relation to the raid.Despite the setback, DJ Drama's Gangsta Grillz: The Album was released in December 2007 on the Grand Hustle label. The album's first buzz single, "Takin' Pictures", was released in March 2007 and featured Jeezy, Willie the Kid, Jim Jones, Rick Ross, Young Buck and T.I. The album's lead single—"5000 Ones" featuring Nelly, T.I., Yung Joc, Willie the Kid, Jeezy, and Twista—debuted on BET. The second single, "The Art of Storytellin' Part 4", was released in 2008 and featured Outkast and Marsha Ambrosius. The album peaked at number 26 on the Billboard 200.In May 2009, DJ Drama released his second album entitled Gangsta Grillz: The Album (Vol. 2), with the singles "Day Dreaming" (featuring Akon, Snoop Dogg and T.I.) and "Ridiculous" (featuring Gucci Mane, Yo Gotti, Lonnie Mac and OJ da Juiceman). In addition to his own studio albums, DJ Drama also continued working on mixtapes, including those for Gucci Mane (Mr. Zone 6), Chris Brown (In My Zone 2), Dead Prez (Revolutionary but Gangsta Grillz), and Wyclef Jean (From the Hut, to the Projects, to the Mansion), among others. In March 2010, Drama appeared on T-Pain's musical television special Freaknik: The Musical, in a voice role as a radio announcer named Mr. Thanksgiving.


=== 2011–present: Third Power and Quality Street Music series, Generation Now record label ===
Drama released his third album, Third Power in October 2011. It featured the single, "Oh My" (featuring Fabolous, Wiz Khalifa, and Roscoe Dash), and reached number 95 on the Billboard Hot 100. He followed that with the release of his fourth album, Quality Street Music, in late 2012. The album was preceded by the singles "We in This Bitch" and "My Moment". The album peaked at number 15 on the Billboard 200, which is the highest a DJ Drama album has gotten on the chart to date.In August 2013, Drama co-founded The Academy, a DJ incubator and art collective, with Don Cannon and DJ Sense. The Academy announced its first roster of 23 DJs in September of that year. In January 2014, it was announced that DJ Drama would join the A&R at Atlantic Records. Within his first year, he had signed several artists to the label, including Kap G, Spenzo, and Que. Throughout this time, he continued hosting and producing mixtapes for artists like 50 Cent (The Lost Tape), Nipsey Hussle (Crenshaw), Snoop Dogg (That's My Work Volume 3), and Big K.R.I.T. (It's Better This Way).In 2015, DJ Drama and Don Cannon founded the Atlantic Records imprint, Generation Now. One of their first signees was Lil Uzi Vert, and Drama served as an executive producer on Uzi's 2015 debut commercial mixtape, Luv Is Rage. Generation Now also signed Skeme to the label that year. In July 2016, Drama released his fifth studio album, Quality Street Music 2, with the single "Wishing" featuring Chris Brown, Skeme, and Lyquin.Generation Now had its first number one record on the Billboard 200 with Lil Uzi Vert's August 2017 debut studio album, Luv Is Rage 2. DJ Drama served as executive producer on the album. Other acts signed to Generation Now by Drama include Skeme, Lyquin, Jack Harlow, Lil James, and Killumantii.In 2021, Drama narrated Tyler, the Creator's album Call Me If You Get Lost, and was credited as a feature on the first track Sir Baudelaire. The album's "intros" and sound was partly inspired by Drama's "Gangsta Grillz" series, and is often credited as a nod to that "mixtape" sound.
A further instalment of the Gangsta Grillz series, D-Day: A Gangsta Grillz Mixtape, was released on March 31, 2022, in collaboration with Dreamville and J. Cole.


== Discography ==

I Told U So (with Yo Gotti) (2006)
Gangsta Grillz: The Album (2007)
There Is No Competition (with Fabolous) (2008)
The City Is In Good Hands (with Snoop Dogg) (2008)
Gangsta Grillz: The Album (Vol. 2) (2009)
Cocaine Konvicts (with French Montana) (2009)
There Is No Competition 2: The Funeral Service (with Fabolous) (2010)
Third Power (2011)
There Is No Competition 3: Death Comes in 3's (with Fabolous) (2011)
Quality Street Music (2012)
Quality Street Music 2 (2016)
It's tha World (2018)
12 AM in Atlanta 2 (with 24hrs) (2020)
Fame or Feds 3 (with Hardo & Deezlee) (2021)
What Would Big Do 2021 (with Fat Joe) (2021)
Gangsta Grillz: We Set the Trends (with Jim Jones) (2022)
The World Is Yours: Gangsta Grillz (with Badda TD) (2022)
Misguided (with OMB Peezy) (2022)
Results Take Time (with Symba) (2022)
Gangsta Grillz: I Still Got It (with Snoop Dogg) (2022)
Snofall (with Jeezy) (2022)
God Save the Rave (with David Sabastian) (2022)
Book of David (with Dave East & Buda & Grandz) (2022)
Paint the City (with Icewear Vezzo) (2022)
Kill Us Both (with Ayilla) (2022)
Rollin Stone (with J. Stone) (2023)
Coke Boys 6 (with French Montana) (2023)
Back on Dexter (with Kash Doll) (2023)
I'm Really Like That (2023)
Gangsta Grillz: Mvrda Gang (with YOVNGCHIMI) (2023)


== Generation Now ==
Generation Now is an American record label imprint founded in 2015 by DJ Drama and Don Cannon. The name of the label derives from a 2004 mixtape Drama and Cannon curated.


== Recognition and awards ==


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website
Gangsta Grillz website
The Aphilliates
DJ Drama at MTV
DJ Drama at AllMusicMichael P. Delaney, better known by his stage name Dub-L, is an American record producer, recording artist and filmmaker.


== Early life ==
Delaney was born and raised in the East Village in New York City. He began writing graffiti in 1991. The name Dub-L comes from his last name, Delaney, which he shortened to Dell for his tag name in high school when he was doing graffiti. People started calling him Double-L, which turned into Dub-L.


== Career ==


=== Music ===
Dub-L produced Aesop Rock's first album, Music for Earthworms, in 1997. Dub-L has said that he is in possession of the masters but will not re-release it, because he likes the fact that it's "rare and legendary."Also in 1997, Dub-L met fellow New York City native and DJ JS-1, who was a member of the Rock Steady Crew. They immediately began collaborating as Ground Original, releasing their debut album in 2002, also called Ground Original, which featured well-known MCs such as KRS-One, Masta Ace, Kool G Rap and Big Daddy Kane, as well as underground MCs such as C-Rayz Walz and Planet Asia. They released Claimstake the next year, which included appearances from Common, J-Live and Jeru the Damaja.In 2003, Dub-L released his debut solo album, Dub-L's In Town, following it up in 2004 with his second album, Day of the Mega Beast! It features guest appearances from artists including Rahzel, Professor X, Hangar 18, DJ JS-1 and MF Grimm. Dub-L produced and rapped on his two solo albums.Dub-L's other work includes the trip hop group The Controls, which he formed with singer Ann Colville in 1998, putting out their debut album the following year. An instrumental version of the album was released in 2012. In 2004, he produced two tracks from MF Doom's second Viktor Vaughn album, Venomous Villain. He has remixed artists including Jennifer Lopez and Jessica Simpson. Dub-L and DJ Cassidy occasionally team up as Cass & Dubs; in 2008, they produced all of O'Neal McKnight's singles, including "Check Your Coat", featuring Greg Nice. After disbanding Cass & Dubs in 2012, he and rapper Chase Phoenix formed the group Monday Morning High.


=== Film ===
His short film Baby Show, based on his Public-access television comedy sketches from the late-1990s, was an official selection at the 2016 International Filmmaker Festival of World Cinema Nice, where Delaney won Best Editing of a Short Film and was nominated for Best Comedy. It was also selected for the NewFilmmakers New York Spring 2016 festival, winning the Audience Choice Award for Best Short Film.


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===
Ground Original (2002, Yosumi Records) – with DJ JS-1
Ground Original Presents: Claimstake (2003, Echelon Records) – with DJ JS-1
Dub-L's In Town (2003, Ground Original)
Day of the Mega Beast! (2004, Day By Day Entertainment)
Sounds Beneath My Bed (2016)


=== Singles ===
"Beyond" – DJ JS-1 & Dub-L featuring O.C. (2002, Ground Original)
"License 2 Ill" b/w "Nowadays" – DJ JS-1 & Dub-L (2002, Fat Beats)
"Won’t Stop" – DJ JS-1 & Dub-L feat. Jeru The Damaja (2003, Echelon Records)
"Never Stop" – Dub-L feat. DJ M.O.S. & O'Neal McKnight (2011, God Lord Recordings)
"Feel Good" – Dub-L (2011, God Lord Recordings)
"Fishing Gear Hookups" – Dub-L & LoDeck (2011)
"Everyday" – Dub-L (2014)
"When the Ace Spins" – Dub-L (2015)
"Ice Cold" – Dub-L (2016)


=== Production discography ===


== References ==


== External links ==
Official websiteVanda Bernadeau, professionally known as Dutch ReBelle, is a rapper from Boston, Massachusetts.


== Early life ==
ReBelle was born in Hinche, Haiti. She was raised in Mattapan and Milton. ReBelle began rapping at age 9. In college, she decided to pursue a music career. ReBelle was discovered while doing locs at the house of a customer whose roommate had a radio show, when she rapped spontaneously on air.


== Career ==
Regarding her stage name, ReBelle has stated, “When I was in high school, it kind of just happened that people started calling me Von Dutch after the trucker hat line. Then it got shortened to Dutch in college, and when I started taking music seriously, I added the ReBelle to the end. It was an ode to my country, but it was also from the Lauryn Hill song “I Find It Hard To Say (Rebel)”. ReBelle played her first gig at Boston University. She then went on to perform at the House of Blues and the Hard Rock Café.In 2012, ReBelle performed at the Female Hip-Hop Honors in Los Angeles. In 2014, she was named Boston Music Awards’s Hip-Hop Artist of the Year. In 2015, she performed at the first Boston Hip Hop Fest in a decade. In 2017, ReBelle's song, "Rude Boys" was featured in Rock Band 4. She's rapped at Isabella Stewart Gardner Museum, Museum of Science's planetarium, and Boston Cannabis Week's music festival. In February 2020, she opened for Rapsody at The Sinclair. In February 2023, ReBelle attended the Grammy Awards for the first time. She is a member of The Recording Academy.KillerBoomBox.com wrote, "If Ghostface Killah and Lauryn had a baby, it would be Dutch." She was named Boston's Best Music Artist of 2018. WBUR dubbed her album, Bang Bang, one of the best local hip-hop albums in 2018. In 2020, Bandcamp wrote, "ReBelle lays bars over trap beats, with a hard edge comparable to Memphis’s Gangsta Boo or Diamond from Atlanta’s Crime Mob."ReBelle has stated she is often the only woman in the room in hip-hop spaces and has to create her own space within these environments. She has said working in a music industry dominated by men is much easier than surviving other traumas she's experienced. She has faced discrimination when trying to book Boston venues as a hip-hop artist.


== Discography ==


=== As primary artist ===


=== As featured artist ===


== References ==Bigram John Zayas (born July 11, 1978), professionally known as DVLP or Develop, is an American record producer, songwriter and disc jockey (DJ). Hailing from New York City, DVLP initially embarked on his career in music   as one-half of the production team Doe Boys, alongside his cousin Matthew "Filthy" Delgiorno. Working primarily in the hip hop, pop, and Latin genres, he has produced over 25 songs for American rapper Lil Wayne, including the songs "Fireman" (2005) and "Blunt Blowin" (2011). In 2013, he gained major recognition when he produced the Eminem single "Rap God", which went on to reach number seven on the US ’’Billboard’’ Hot 100 chart.


== Early life ==
Zayas was born in New York City. He never had any formal musical training, although his family is involved in music. He first started DJing at the age of 11, using house and freestyle records. He went on to make mixtapes and perform at high school parties.


== Career ==


=== Turntablism ===
While traveling around the world as a founding member of the turntablist collective The Allies (which also included Craze, J-Smoke, Spictakular, Infamous, A-Trak and Klever), he went by the moniker Develop. His emphasis was on beat juggling. In 1998, he won the ITF Beat Juggling Championship, defeating Total Eclipse of The X-Ecutioners in the finals. In 1999, he won the ITF Team Championship, and he was runner-up at the New York DMC Regional in 1998. In 2000, The Allies released an EP, D-Day.


=== Beginnings in Production ===
In 2000, DVLP decided to end his career as a competitive DJ, in order to focus on producing and songwriting. Shortly afterwards, he began collaborating with Filthy (his cousin, Matthew Delgiorno). The duo were known as the Doe Boys. After taking a few years off to hone his production skills, his first major production work was on the 2004 Grafh song "Damage is Done." He went on to produce four tracks on Juelz Santana's What the Game's Been Missing! (2005), also assisting with recording and engineering.DVLP has gone on to write and produce for Shells, The Diplomats (aka Dipset), Kelly Rowland, Fabolous, Cam'ron, DJ Clue?, Fat Joe, Jennifer Lopez, Pitbull, Nicki Minaj, Rick Ross, John Legend and others.


=== Work with Lil Wayne ===
DVLP started working with Lil Wayne in 2005, after Juelz Santana introduced them at his studio. The Doe Boys produced three tracks on Tha Carter II, including the album's lead single, "Fireman," which reached #10 on the Billboard Rap chart and #32 on the Billboard Hot 100. "Fireman" was Lil Wayne's first single following his split from former producer Mannie Fresh. After Tha Carter II, DVLP continued working with Lil Wayne; he has produced over 25 songs for him through 2013.
In 2011, he dropped the vowels from his moniker and became DVLP. That year, for Tha Carter IV, he produced "Blunt Blowin," which reached #33 on the Billboard Hot 100 charts. Lil Wayne recorded the track on his first day back in the studio after being released from prison. Other notable tracks DVLP has produced for Lil Wayne include "What's Wrong With Them" featuring Nicki Minaj, from 2010's I Am Not a Human Being, and "Beat The Shit" featuring Gunplay, from the 2013 album I Am Not a Human Being II.


=== Work with Eminem ===
DVLP produced Eminem's "Rap God", released October 15, 2013, as the third single off The Marshall Mathers LP 2. DVLP first created the track in 2011, without any particular artist in mind. His manager, Stephen Hacker of Hebrew Hustle, sent the track to Eminem in 2012 after Eminem's management team reached out to Hacker for tracks for his upcoming album. DVLP has since said that he can't imagine any other rapper on the track. The song, about Eminem's history and the rappers who have inspired him, was praised as being in line with the quality of Eminem's best offerings. It reached #1 on the Billboard Rap chart and #7 on the Hot 100 charts. At the inaugural YouTube Music Awards in 2013, Eminem shot a live video for "Rap God." An official music video for the song, shot in Detroit, was released in November 2013.


=== Pop Work ===
DVLP has collaborated with producer RedOne on records by a variety of pop artists. They co-produced Paulina Rubio's 2012 single "Me Gustas Tanto," which reached #1 on the Billboard Hot Latin Songs chart and #2 on the Billboard Latin Pop Songs chart; and Pitbull's 2012 single "Get It Started" featuring Shakira, which reached #28 on the Billboard Latin Pop Songs chart, #89 on the Billboard Hot 100, and was certified gold in Canada. In 2011, as a member of the DJ duo The WAV.s (with Bilal the Chef), DVLP worked on Enrique Iglesias's single "I Like How It Feels" featuring Pitbull, which reached #1 on the Billboard Dance/Club Play Songs chart, #74 on the Billboard Hot 100, and was certified platinum in Canada and gold in Australia. DVLP and Bilal the Chef were featured in the song's video, directed by Iglesias.In 2010, DVLP formed the band Mad Ave Boys, now known as Dameht, producing their debut EP Electric Tape. He also played bass and synth on the release.


=== Reggaeton ===
Around 2015, DVLP began producing Latin music for artists including Fuego, J Balvin, Justin Quiles, Matt Hunter and Jencarlos Canela. He produced two songs on J Balvin's album Energia, which reached number 1 on the Billboard Top Latin Albums chart and won Best Urban Music Album at the 2016 Latin Grammy Awards. DVLP also produced "Ay Mi Dios" by IAmChino, Pitbull, Yandel and Chacal, which reached number 1 on the Billboard Latin Airplay and Tropical Airplay charts.


=== Transcend.ent ===
In 2017, DVLP launched the record label and management company Transcend.ent, which is partnered with Universal Music Group. Their first signing was Matt Hunter.


=== Looplabs ===
DVLP is a partner in Looplabs, a cloud-based music studio collaborative allowing musicians to create and share tracks and compositions. In 2016, Looplabs partnered with Beatport to provide loops, sounds and samples to Looplabs users with Beatport accounts, and to allow these users to publish tracks to Beatport's streaming platform.


== Discography ==


=== Production Discography ===


=== Non-Commercial Release Discography ===
Lil Wayne, "Yeah Develop"
Lil Wayne, "Brand New"
Lil Wayne, "When They Come For Me"
Lil Wayne, "Side Bitch"
Lil Wayne, "305"
Lil Wayne, "Done It"
Lil Wayne, "She's A Rider"
Lil Wayne, "Nigga Wit Money"
Lil Wayne, "Pump That Bass"
Lil Wayne, "Damage Is Done"
Lil Wayne ft. Mack Maine, "Workin' Em"
Lil Wayne ft. Mack Maine & Boo, "Open Shop"
Lil Wayne & Juelz Santana, "I Can't Feel My Face"
Lil Wayne & Juelz Santana, "Welcome to the Concrete Jungle"
Lil Wayne ft. Juelz Santana, "Always Strapped" (original)
Lil Wayne & Juelz Santana, "Pick & Roll"
Lil Wayne & Juelz Santana, "Favorite Things"
Lil Wayne ft. Mike Tyson, "American Dream"
The Allies – D-Day (2000)
"Banoodles," Turntablist Revolution Vol. 1 compilation (1999, as DJ Develop)


== References ==


== External links ==
DVLP at AllMusic
Develop discography at DiscogsSean Joseph Pompey (born February 8, 1984), better known by his stage name Smoke DZA, is an American rapper and songwriter.


== Biography ==


=== 1984–2007: Early life and career beginnings ===
Smoke DZA was born February 8, 1984, at Harlem Hospital in New York City and has lived in New York all his life. The son of two Guyanese immigrants, Smoke was exposed to music at home by his father and fell in love with hip hop at a young age. He grew up listening to and emulating fellow New Yorkers Jay-Z and Notorious BIG.  After dropping out of high school to pursue his music career, DZA began battle rapping and has battled fellow Harlem-based rapper J.R. Writer. Smoke DZA decided on his moniker after being influenced by Chris Tucker's character Smokey from the movie Friday and the acronym DZA stands for "Dream Zone Achieve". He was discovered by Jonny Shipes of Cinematic Music Group in 2002 and went on to ghostwrite for numerous rappers, including  Hi-Tek. In 2002, he partnered to become one half of the group Smoke & Numbers, until going solo in 2008.


=== 2008–2016: Rugby Thompson, Dream.Zone.Achieve and Don't Smoke Rock ===
Since splitting from Smoke & Numbers to pursue a solo career, DZA has released a string of mixtapes including Substance Abuse, Substance Abuse 1.5, George Kush The Button, Rolling Stoned, Sweet Baby Kushed God, Cuz I Felt Like It and K.O.N.Y. He has worked with Big K.R.I.T., Wiz Khalifa, and ASAP Rocky among others and is a founding member of the Smokers Club.  His album, Rolling Stoned was awarded the High Times Doobie Award for Hip Hop album of the year for 2011.  DZA latest album Rugby Thompson was released in June 2012 by High Times and Cinematic Music Group. The album was produced entirely by Harry Fraud. The album features numerous artists including Action Bronson, Currensy, Domo Genesis, Schoolboy Q and ASAP Twelvyy.On April 1, 2014, Smoke DZA released Dream.Zone.Achieve, his third studio album. The album consisted of 21 songs broken down into three sections, Dream, Zone and Achieve, each with 7 tracks. Features included fellow Harlem native Cam'ron, Joey Bada$$, Ab-Soul, Wiz Khalifa and Curren$y.On April 6, 2014, in the midst of WrestleMania XXX, Smoke DZA released a mixtape titled Ringside 2, the second installment in his wrestling-inspired Ringside EP series. Production was handled his by fellow R.F.C. member 183rd, with features from Peter Rosenberg, then WWE Intercontinental Champion Big E Langston, Aston Matthews and Flatbush Zombies.On December 2, 2016, he and Pete Rock released "Don't Smoke Rock", featuring 13 songs with guest appearances from Rick Ross, Dave East, Cam'ron, Big K.R.I.T. and Mac Miller.Smoke DZA released his eight album, Homegrown, on October 2, 2020. It marks his fourth project of the year, following the acclaimed A Closed Mouth Don't Get Fed, Ringside 8 and The Smokers Club Presents: Smoke DZA's Worldwide Smoke Session, the latter of which was released on April 20. Homegrown is an ode to his native New York City.


== Musical style and influences ==
Smoke cites fellow New York natives Jay-Z and Notorious B.I.G. as his main influences. As an adolescent he would use their songs and write his own lyrics, helping him learn rhyming patterns."I used to re-write Biggie. It started with 'Mo Money, Mo Problems.' I would switch up the words, make it my own." He has also cited fellow Harlem rappers like Mase, Big L and Dipset as influences and inspiration.  Though he is often mistakenly classified as a weed rapper, Smoke considers himself a lifestyle rapper and prefers not to be confined to one genre of rap. DZA's albums and mixtapes often feature many collaborative tracks. DZA says he enjoys collaborating with fellow artists like Dom Kennedy and Kendrick Lamar as he feels it helps him "step his ball game up" in terms of his craft.


== Personal life ==
In 2016, Smoke endorsed Bernie Sanders' presidential bid.


== Discography ==

Rolling Stoned (2011)
Rugby Thompson (2012)
Dream. Zone. Achieve (2014)
He Has Risen (2016)
Don't Smoke Rock (2016)
Not for Sale (2018)
A Closed Mouth Don't Get Fed (2020)
Homegrown (2020)
Full Court Press (with Girl Talk, Wiz Khalifa, and Big K.R.I.T.) (2022)


== References ==


== External links ==
Official websiteMalcolm Greenidge (born July 7, 1974), known as E.D.I Mean and EDIDON, is an American hip hop artist and a member of the Outlawz. The name is a play on the name Idi Amin, former dictator of Uganda. While in the third grade, Malcolm became friends with Katari "Kastro" Cox who later introduced him to his cousin, Tupac Shakur.


== Dramacydal ==
In 1992, Kastro, Greenidge, and Tupac's godbrother Yafeu "Kadafi" Fula, formed a rap trio. Greenridge began rapping under the alias "Big Malcolm". The trio went under the names Thoro Headz and Young Thugs. By then, Tupac had become a rap star and they were featured on his single, "Holla If Ya Hear Me", released on February 4, 1993. In 1994, Mutah "Napoleon" Beale joined the group, which was now known as Dramacydal. They guest appeared on the songs "Me Against the World" and "Outlaw" from Tupac's LP, Me Against the World, which was released on March 14, 1995.


== Outlawz ==
Upon Tupac's release from prison in 1995, Greenidge, Tupac, Bruce "Hussein" Washington, Kadafi, Big Syke, Mopreme Shakur, Kastro, and Napoleon formed the group Outlaw Immortalz, which later changed to the Outlawz. Tupac gave each group member an alias from an enemy of the United States of America. Shakur gave Greenidge the alias E.D.I Mean after former Ugandan president Idi Amin. E.D.I Mean appeared on "Tradin' War Stories," "When We Ride," and "Thug Passion from Tupac's double LP, All Eyez on Me, which was released on February 13, 1996.On June 4, 1996, Tupac's "How Do U Want It" single was released.  Its b-side, "Hit 'Em Up", featured E.D.I Mean, Hussein and Kadafi. It is considered one of the most aggressive diss songs in history, dissing Bad Boy Entertainment, Chino XL, Junior M.A.F.I.A. and Mobb Deep.On September 7, 1996, Tupac was shot four times in a drive-by-shooting in Las Vegas, Nevada. He was taken to University Medical Center where he died six days later. E.D.I Mean was in the car behind Tupac, but claimed he could not identify the murderer. E.D.I Mean and the rest of the Outlawz moved back to the East Coast after Shakur's death. Tupac's LP, The Don Killuminati: The 7 Day Theory, was released on November 5, 1996. E.D.I Mean appeared on three songs, "Intro/Bomb First (My Second Reply)," "Life Of An Outlaw" and "Just Like Daddy. On November 10, just five days after Tupac's album was released, Kadafi was shot in the head in New Jersey, while visiting his girlfriend, and died instantly.  He was found wearing a bullet proof vest.In March 1997, E.D.I Mean and the rest of the Outlawz (minus Fatal) moved back to California and signed with Death Row Records. Tupac's double LP, "R U Still Down? (Remember Me)" was released on November 25, 1997. E.D.I Mean produced six songs on it, "Redemption," "Thug Style," "Fuck All Y'all," "Let Them Thangs Go," "When I Get Free," and "Enemies With Me." On December 21, 1999, the Outlawz' debut album, Still I Rise, was released.In 1999, the Outlawz, (excluding Fatal, who by now had a disagreement with the group and felt they had betrayed Tupac by signing with Death Row), started Outlawz Records and released their second and third LPs, Ride Wit Us Or Collide Wit Us and Novakane, on November 7, 2000 and October 23, 2001.


== Discography ==


=== Solo albums ===
2010: The Stash Spot
2013: O.G. Est. 1992
2015: The Hope Dealer
2018: The Hope Dealer 2
2020: O.G. Part 2: Classics in Session
2023: OG 3: La Bella Vita
2023: The Hope Dealer, Pt. 3


=== Collaboration albums ===
2002: Blood Brothers (with Kastro)
2006: Against All Oddz (with Young Noble)
2008: Doin' It Big (with 8Ball)
2015: Ghetto Starz: Streets to the Stage (with Nutt-So)
2022: Souljahz 2 Generalz (with Yhung T.O.)


=== Singles ===
2013: "No Lights On" (feat. Stormey Coleman & Redcoat da Poet)
2015: "The Move-ment"
2015: "#W!NU4" (feat. Deladiea & DJ Stay Turnt Up)
2016: "Love Will Do"
2016: "Visions" (Sacx One & Dr. X feat. Edidon)
2017: "Wounds" (feat. Young Noble)
2018: "Dreams" (feat. Aktual)
2020: "Roses"
2020: "Ridin'"
2021: "One Nation" (feat. Xzibit)
2021: "21 Gun Salute" (feat. C-Bo & Ajayofficial)


=== Guest appearances ===
1996: "Bomb First (My Second Reply)" (Makaveli featuring E.D.I. Mean & Young Noble)
1998: "Young Ritzy Outlaw" (Gonzoe featuring E.D.I. Mean)
2000: "Thug Livin' (Part II)" (Killa Tay featuring Cosmo & E.D.I. Mean)
2001: "Good Life" (2Pac featuring Big Syke & E.D.I. Mean)
2002: "Never B Peace (Nitty Remix)" (2Pac featuring Kastro & E.D.I. Mean)
2002: "Out Of Position" (Hellraza featuring E.D.I.)
2002: "Get Doe" (Hellraza featuring Akwalla, Phats Bossi & E.D.I. Mean)
2002: "My Niggaz" (Big Syke  featuring E.D.I. Mean & Young Noble)
2002: "Because Of U Girl (OG Mix)" (Daz Dillinger featuring Storm & E.D.I. Mean)
2004: "The Uppercut" (2Pac featuring E.D.I. Mean & Young Noble)
2004: "Hennessey (Red Spyda Remix)" (2Pac featuring Sleepy Brown & E.D.I. Mean)
2009: "Ice Kold" (Tha Realest featuring E.D.I. Mean)


=== As producer ===


== References ==


== External links ==
Official websiteSpencer George Bellamy (born October 30, 1969), better known as East Flatbush Project (also known as Spencer 4 Hire), is an American hip hop record producer from Brooklyn, New York City, New York. He has released six singles to date, the most famous of which is titled "Tried by 12". Each single was released on his record label, 10/30 Uproar Records. The East Flatbush Project has released an EP in July 2008 titled "First Born" that is available online.
In 2011, DJ Premier used the "Tried by 12" instrumental as the beat for the Shady 2.0 cypher at the 2011 BET Hip Hop Awards. The cypher consisted of Eminem, Shady Records artists Slaughterhouse (a hip hop collective of rappers Royce da 5'9", Joe Budden, Joell Ortiz and Crooked I) and Yelawolf all freestyling over the beat. This cypher was critically acclaimed and became one of the most discussed events to take place at the awards.


== Discography ==


== References ==David Lawrence Brewster Jr. (born June 3, 1988), better known by his stage name Dave East, is an American rapper. East began his career in 2010, and gained attention in 2014 from his eighth mixtape, Black Rose. Its release garnered the attention of fellow New York rapper Nas, who later signed East to his record label, Mass Appeal Records, and later in conjunction with Def Jam Recordings.
In 2016, East was chosen as part of the XXL magazine's 2016 Freshman Class. His tenth mixtape, Kairi Chanel, was released in the same year and peaked at number 38 on the US Billboard 200. His eleventh mixtape, Paranoia: A True Story, was released in 2017 with features from Nas, Wiz Khalifa and Chris Brown amongst others and peaked at number 9 on the US Billboard 200. His debut studio album Survival was released on November 8, 2019, and peaked at number 11 on the Billboard 200. He released the mixtape Karma 3 in 2020, to critical acclaim and peaked at number 36 on the US Billboard 200.
East began his acting career in 2017, where he had a role as himself in Being Mary Jane and The Breaks. He also had a supporting role in the Netflix film Beats (2019) as "Mister Ford". His breakthrough acting role came in the Hulu series Wu-Tang: An American Saga (2019) where he portrays Method Man.


== Early life ==
David Lawrence Brewster Jr. was born in New York City and spent his life between East Harlem where his mother resided, and Ravenswood where he lived with his aunt in his late adolescent life. The rapper is of Bajan, Louisiana Creole and Dominican descent. He played basketball, and football at Springbrook High School in Silver Spring, MD near Washington, D.C. Additionally, he played in the Amateur Athletic Union (AAU) with then-future NBA players Ty Lawson, Greivis Vasquez and developed a close friendship with current Phoenix Suns all-star Kevin Durant.


== College basketball career ==
After Springbrook High School, East attended the University of Richmond, then transferred to Towson University where he played basketball. While attending Towson, East had ongoing issues with coaching staff which ultimately led to his decision to leave the university. Shortly afterward, he started running into legal trouble in Baltimore, Maryland.


=== Career statistics ===


== Career ==


=== 2010–2013: Beginnings ===
In 2010, he released his first mixtape Change of Plans which gained him a little recognition. He later released the mixtapes Insomnia, American Greed, Don't Sleep and No Regrets, solidifying his commitment to music. In 2013, East periodically sold drugs throughout Harlem to support himself and his music. He then released his sixth mixtape Gemini.


=== 2014–2016: Mass Appeal signing and Kairi Chanel ===
In 2014, his music reached the ears of rapper, Nas who quickly looked for ways to contact East. Unbeknownst to Nas, East was close friends with Nas' younger brother and fellow rapper Jungle, who quickly introduced the two. By the summer of 2014, East was the newest signee of Nas' new Mass Appeal Records along with Bishop Nehru, Fashawn, Boldy James and Run The Jewels. In July 2014, he released his seventh mixtape Black Rose through the label, which received favorable reviews from music critics. In 2015, he released his eighth mixtape Hate Me Now which gained great recognition which allowed him to gain key features from well respected emcees such as, Pusha T, Nas, and two-thirds of The Lox, Jadakiss and Styles P.In June 2016, XXL magazine revealed their annual Freshman Class for 2016, which included East, along with G Herbo, 21 Savage, Kodak Black, Lil Uzi Vert, Lil Yachty, Desiigner, Lil Dicky, Denzel Curry, and Anderson Paak. on July 7, 2016, East participated in the freshmen cypher along with Chicago's G Herbo hosted by Philadelphia's very own, DJ Drama. In August 2016, he released a joint extended play titled Born Broke, Die Rich with rapper Kur. In September 2016, East was featured on the BET Hip Hop Awards cypher alongside Young M.A., Ms. Jade, Kur and Sam Black. On September 29, 2016, he announced that he has signed a deal with Def Jam Recordings with the deal negotiated by Hip-hop executive Steven "Steve-O" Carless  and the next day released the mixtape, Kairi Chanel, which peaked at number 38 on the US Billboard 200. Kairi Chanel featured a few notable names such as, Fabolous, The Game, The Diplomats; Cam'ron, Beanie Sigel, and 2 Chainz.


=== 2017–2018: Acting debut and Paranoia 2 ===
In January 2017, East made his acting debut, starring in BET's Being Mary Jane series. He later appeared in Puma's Tsugi Shinsei commercial and starred in rapper, Trina's "It Ain't Me" music video. In August 2017, East released his the EP, Paranoia: A True Story, supported by a few tracks such as the single "Perfect" featuring American Singer, Chris Brown, "Paranoia" along with Jeezy, and "Phone Jumpin" with Wiz Khalifa. The EP peaked at number nine on the Billboard 200. Later in the year East released his 11th mixtape, Karma which was hosted by DJ Holiday. This was the beginning of the Karma series. This tape featured tracks such as "Militant" with Bronx rapper, Don Q. Chris Brown also reappeared on "Bentley Truck" track which was also featured on the Karma tape. In September 2017, East hosted the first annual Goldie Awards, a DJ and producer battle set taking place in New York City.East started the new year by dropping his 12th mixtape Paranoia 2. on January 15, 2018. In February 2018 is when the rapper started to network and reach endorsements that would later further his career. In February, East signed a sponsorship with Belaire Rose. The signing of this deal led up to a promotional music video for the brand. The track is titled, "Fresh Prince of Belaire" by Rick Ross which featured East. March 2018, East signed an endorsement deal with New Era Cap launching his new "lifestyle" 59fifty fitted collection. Shortly after his newly found endorsement, East was featured in New Era's "Claim the Crown" commercial along with some of the top MLB stars such as, Javier Baez, Jose Altuve, and award-winning producer, Mike Will Made It. As things continued to look up for East, he released his 13th mixtape on July 27, 2018, which was titled Karma 2. This mixtape featured up-and-coming artists such as Lil Durk, Gunna and BlocBoy JB. He also had features from his two lifetime friends Kiing Shooter and Border Buck. Although this tape did not reach the same success as his first studio album, it still managed to peak at number 41 on the Billboard 200. East is known for putting out music more frequently than other artists. In the same calendar year, he released his 15th mixtape, Beloved, which saw him join his favorite MC, Styles P. The tape exposed and expressed the gritty street life of New York City.


=== 2019–2021: Survival and Karma 3 ===
East made his movie debut  in the Netflix film Beats (2019) in which he had a supporting role as "Mister Ford". His breakthrough acting role came in the Hulu series Wu-Tang: An American Saga (2019) where he portrays Method Man as a series regular. In September 2019, it was confirmed that East would have a supporting role in the film Boogie (2021). After a night in Las Vegas gone wrong, East was pulled from the film. The role of "Monk" was recast and eventually played by Pop Smoke.In 2019, he was featured on the single "Is U Down" by Pvrx and appeared as a guest vocalist on the single "Taxin" by DJ Shadow. He released a two part promotional release titled Survival Pacc with the singles "Everyday" featuring Gunna on and "Wanna Be a G" featuring Max B on August 1, 2019, as a pre-release for his debut album.
On October 4, 2019, East released the single "Alone" featuring Jacquees to support the release of his then upcoming debut album. He released the album, Survival, on November 8, 2019, through Def Jam Recordings, Mass Appeal Records, and his own label From the Dirt. It features guest appearances from Teyana Taylor, Rick Ross, Nas, The-Dream, Lil Baby, amongst others. East also started his first world tour in release of the album, titled the Survival Tour which spanned from November 22, 2019 — December 20, 2019.
On March 8, 2020, East announced that he was working on the third installment in the Karma series of mixtapes. The mixtape cover featured background images of East with the now late rappers Nipsey Hussle and Pop Smoke, and East stated that he and Nipsey were making plans to create a collaborative project prior to his death. The album was initially set to be titled Thoughts of a Menace, however it was changed to simply Karma 3. Like his previous album, it was released via Def Jam and Mass Appeal. He released the lead single of the mixtape, "Really wit Me", on March 12, 2020. Numerous people, including Korey Wise made a cameo in the music video. Karma 3 was released on August 14, 2020, to critical acclaim. A deluxe version of the mixtape followed on October 23, 2020, with features from Dej Loaf, Junior Reid, Chris Brown and G Herbo, as well as the "Handsome" remix featuring Jeezy.On July 30, 2021, East and producer Harry Fraud released a collaborative album titled Hoffa. That same year, he purchased a storefront in his hometown, and plans to open additional businesses.


=== 2022/2023: Upcoming releases ===
In a January 2022 interview with Vibe, East revealed he had been working on various projects, which he intends to release in the year, the first of which will be Beloved 2, a sequel to his 2018 joint-album with Styles P. He also said his next solo project with Def Jam/Mass Appeal will likely be released in February or March. He also confirmed a follow-up to Survival. And he has Book of David 2 with Buddha and Grandz, HDIGH 2 with Mike and Keyz,  Cool and Dre Collab tape,  young chris EP 6 PACC, Pablo and Blanco 2 with Millyz and Arrabmuzik collab tape all in the works.


== Artistry ==
East is known for his raw lyricism and dark storytelling about street life. He is influenced by, Styles P, Jadakiss, Cam'ron, Big Pun, Nas, The Notorious B.I.G., Raekwon, DMX, Tupac, Snoop Dogg and The Diplomats.


== Personal life ==
East as a teen joined the Rollin' 30s Harlem Crips, a subset of the larger Crips gang. East started serving a prison sentence, and during this time he converted to Islam and considered himself a Muslim. Commenting on his conversion, East stated; "Islam really brought a discipline to my life that I didn't really have before... My old mindset was if they ain't helping me, I ain't helping them, but you can't live life that way." East has two daughters with Millie Colon, born in 2016 and 2020.


== Discography ==

Survival (2019)
Fortune Favors the Bold (2023)


== Filmography ==


== Awards and nominations ==


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website 
Dave East at AllMusic 
Dave East discography at Discogs 
Dave East at Zulupop
College basketball statistics @ sports-reference.comEdward Anderson (born November 27, 1970) is a hip-hop artist from Boston, Massachusetts, better known by his stage name Edo G. Edo is the seniormost hip-hop artist from Boston (if not from anywhere in Massachusetts), in the sense that he was the first to gain recognition in New York City and in the wider United States of America, and remains one of the best-known Boston rap artist internationally, having collaborated with large numbers of independent rap artists all over the globe. He is additionally known by the name Ed O.G., which was initially a misspelling by a record label but has endured.


== Career ==
Edward Anderson was born in Roxbury—a working class, predominantly black neighborhood in Boston, Massachusetts. His first stage name was Ed Rock, and started his career in the late 1980s at age 15, in a crew called F.T.I. – Fresh To Impress. They had a song called  "Suzi Q" on the "Boston Goes Def!" vinyl LP compilation, which was released in 1986. Three years later, with the help of New York's Awesome 2 duo (Teddy Ted and Special K) formed Ed O.G and Da Bulldogs in late 1989. He released his first album in 1991 with his group Da Bulldogs, titled Life of a Kid in the Ghetto. The album included the song "Be a Father to Your Child," which received airplay on local Boston radio stations, and "I Got To Have It", which was sampled later by Mary J. Blige on the track "Ooh!". The group was dropped from Mercury Records in 1993.Edo G. has subsequently gone on to release four solo albums and two EPs, toured around the world, and worked with other artists including Pete Rock, DJ Premier, RZA, KRS-One, Common, Black Thought of The Roots and Masta Ace.
On his solo album The Truth Hurts, he combined with DJ Premier and Pete Rock; "Wishful Thinking" was a sequel of his first solo performance. The connection with Rock turned into a partnership for the album My Own Worst Enemy. One of the album's songs, "Wishing" (featuring Masta Ace), was featured on The Boondocks in episode 9, Return of the King.
In 2005, Edo G. started a new group called Special Teamz with fellow Boston rappers Jaysaun (of Kreators) and Slaine (of La Coka Nostra). They released a mixtape on November 11, 2005, entitled The Mixtape. Special Teamz released the album, Stereotypez, on September 25, 2007, which featured production from Pete Rock, DJ Premier, and specialist producer Marco Polo, who had previously collaborated with Jake One and Ill Bill.  Appearances on the album included Buckshot and Sean Price of Boot Camp Clik, Ill Bill, Akrobatik and Devin the Dude.
Edo G. proceeded to work on a new album with Masta Ace. The first single, titled "Little Young" was released via Myspace. The album was scheduled for release in October 2009, but the release was delayed by a cease-and-desist order from A&E Television Networks, which required a complete revision of the album cover artwork and design, due to copyright issues, as Edo and Masta Ace called their duo "A&E".
Edo G. is also a member of the Boston hip hop group 4Peace along with Twice Thou, Wyatt Jackson, and DQuest.
In 2013, Edo G and OhNo collaborated on the song "Done Talking".


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===
The Truth Hurts (2000)
Wishful Thinking (2002)
A Face In The Crowd (2011)
Intelligence & Ignorance (2013)
After All These Years (2014)
FreEDOm (2017)Collaboration albums

Life of a Kid in the Ghetto (with Da Bulldogs) (1991)
Roxbury 02119 (with Da Bulldogs) (1993)
My Own Worst Enemy (with Pete Rock) (2004)
Stereotypez (with Special Teamz) (2007)
Acting (with Da Bulldogs) (2008)
Arts & Entertainment (with Masta Ace) (2009)
Afterwords (with Street Wyze) (2015)
Edo.G & Insight Innovates (with Insight Innovates) (2021)


=== Appearances ===
1992: "Do Whatta I Gotta Do" (from the Brand New Heavies album Heavy Rhyme Experience)
1994: "As Long As You Know" (from the Scientifik album Criminal)
2001: "Rollin' Dolo" (from the Guru album Baldhead Slick & da Click)
2001: "Gunz Still Hot (Remix)" (from the Rasco album Hostile Environment)
2004: "Wutuwankno" (from the Masta Ace album A Long Hot Summer)
2004: "CpH Claimin' Respect #2" (from The Boulevard Connection 12" EP CpH Claimin' Respect #2/G.A. (Remix))
2004: "Mind in a Spin" (from the Time Machine album 'Slow Your Roll')
2005: "Official" (From the Big Shug album Never Say Die)
2005: "Experience (Why Don't You?)" (from the Sadat X album Experience & Education)
2005: "IllState MASSive pt2" (from the Earatik Statik album Feelin Earatik)
2006: "Heart" (from the Shinsight Trio album Shallow Nights Blurry Moon)
2007: "Time & Place" (from the Marco Polo album Port Authority)
2007: "Nothin' You Say" (from the Snowgoons album German Lugers)
2007: "Crowd Control" (from the Oak Lonetree album The One)
2007: "No More" (from the Verb T album Broken Window)
2008: "Who Made the Rules" (from the King Magnetic album Everythings a Gamble Vol. 1)
2008: "Nobody Like Me" (from the DJ K.O. album Picture This ...)
2008: "Raining" (from the Snowgoons album Black Snow)
2009: "Hip-Hop Lives" (from the JR & PH7 album The Standard)
2009: "Miss Those Years" (from the Earatik Statik album Good, Bad & Ugly)
2010: "Tribute To The DJ" (from the M-Dot & DJ Jean Maron album Run MPC)
2010: "Fiyah" (from the Capitol 1212 EP History of Silence)
2010: "Fall Back" (from the Omega Red album RedTape Vol.3)
2010: "Freestyle" feat. Jean Marron (from the Dany Dan album A la régulière)
2014: "No Hooks 2014" (from the Far From Ya Average album "The Basement LP")
2016: "Plane Gang" (from the Reks album "The Greatest X")
2017: "Verbal Assault" (with Akrobatik and King T)
2021: "Riot Gear" (with Ben Shorr, DJ Boogie Blind & Sadat X)


== References ==


== External links ==
Ed O.G. at DiscogsJaime Meline (born March 2, 1975), better known by the stage name El-P (shortened from his previous stage name El Producto), is an American rapper, songwriter, and record producer. Starting his career as a member of Company Flow, he has been a driving force in alternative hip hop since the mid-1990s, producing for rappers including Aesop Rock, Cage, and Mr. Lif. He was a member of The Weathermen and is the co-founder, owner, and CEO of the Definitive Jux record label.
After releasing four solo studio albums that were critically acclaimed—Fantastic Damage (2002), High Water (2004), I'll Sleep When You're Dead (2007), and Cancer 4 Cure (2012)—El-P began experiencing mainstream success in 2013 when he formed the hip hop duo Run the Jewels with fellow rapper Killer Mike. They have released four studio albums for free, all of which have received widespread acclaim: Run the Jewels (2013), Run the Jewels 2 (2014), Run the Jewels 3 (2016), and RTJ4 (2020).


== Early life ==
El-P was born Jaime Meline in the Brooklyn borough of New York City on March 2, 1975, the son of Nan Dillon and jazz pianist Harry Meline (who performed under the stage name Harry Keyes). He is of Cajun, Irish, and Lithuanian descent. Although his mother was raised Catholic and his father was raised Jewish, they did not emphasize either faith to him during his childhood and he later joked that he "got none of it except a circumcision at birth".El-P's parents divorced when he was seven years old, and he later wrote the song "Last Good Sleep" about once hearing his mother being assaulted by his drunken stepfather in the next room and not realizing what had happened until the next day. His mother responded to the beating by immediately ending the relationship, reporting El-P's stepfather to the police, and changing their home's locks; however, El-P had recurring nightmares about the incident for many years, and once chased a stranger he misidentified as his ex-stepfather through the New York subway.El-P was expelled from two high schools for various issues, including his refusal to stop wearing his baseball cap backwards. He later got his GED. He went to musical engineering school at the Center for the Media Arts in Manhattan. After graduating, he enrolled at Hunter College, but dropped out because most of his courses did not relate to the career he wanted.


== Career ==


=== Early career ===
Getting involved with the hip hop culture of New York City at an early age, El-P met Mr. Len when he hired Len as the DJ for his 17th birthday party. The two became friends and formed Company Flow in 1992. They released their first single, "Juvenile Technique", in 1993. Bigg Jus joined the group and in 1995 the trio released their debut EP, Funcrusher. It sold well for an independently released record, with more than 30,000 copies sold despite only being available on vinyl. Subject to a major-label bidding war after the success of the EP, Company Flow waited until it could get a contract on its own terms. The group eventually signed with Rawkus Records, and released its debut full-length album, Funcrusher Plus (1997).
After an instrumental album titled Little Johnny From the Hospitul: Breaks & Instrumentals Vol.1 (1999), also on Rawkus, disagreements between El-P and the label led to Company Flow leaving Rawkus. El-P decided to start his own record label, Definitive Jux (known informally as Def Jux, and extra-formally as Definitive Juxtapositions), and because of critically acclaimed albums such as Cannibal Ox's The Cold Vein (produced by El-P) and Aesop Rock's Labor Days, the label rose to prominence.
Company Flow dissolved amicably in 2001 and the following year El-P released his debut solo album Fantastic Damage, to critical acclaim. In 2004, El-P collaborated with the Blue Series Continuum for a jazz-fusion album titled High Water, which received favorable reviews from both hip hop and jazz critics, as well as from more mainstream critics independent of both scenes. 2005 saw the release of Collecting the Kid, an odds-and-ends assortment including work from High Water and Bomb the System, in addition to several songs of unknown provenance. El-P's second proper studio album, I'll Sleep When You're Dead, was released on March 20, 2007. It generally received very favorable reviews and became El-P's most commercially successful album as a solo artist to date, peaking at No. 78 on the U.S. Billboard 200. In an interview about I'll Sleep When You're Dead, he identifies himself as an atheist.In October 2009, El-P announced that he was working on his third studio album, titled Cancer 4 Cure. El-P was a part of a group called Central Services, which consisted of El-P, Camu Tao, and Allysin Baker. In the fall of 2010, the EP Forever Frozen in Television Time, was released exclusively on the Def Jux digital download service. In August 2011, it was announced that El-P signed with Fat Possum Records, which would release Cancer 4 Cure. Later that month, El-P released a single off the upcoming album, via the Adult Swim Singles program, titled "Drones Over BKLYN". On February 22, 2012, El-P announced on his Facebook page that Cancer 4 Cure was complete. The album was released to music retailers on May 22.


=== Run the Jewels ===

Run the Jewels, a collaboration of El-P with Atlanta-based rapper Killer Mike, was formed in 2013. The two rappers were introduced to each other by Adult Swim executive Jason DeMarco in 2011. The meeting led to several collaborations, including Killer Mike being featured on the song "Tougher Colder Killer" from Cancer 4 Cure while El-P produced the entirety of Killer Mike's sixth album R.A.P. Music. When R.A.P. Music and Cancer 4 Cure were released within weeks of each other, a joint tour was planned. The success of the tour eventually led to the formation of Run the Jewels. The duo released their self-titled debut album on June 26, 2013. They released Run the Jewels 2 on October 28, 2014. Run the Jewels 3 was released on December 24, 2016, three weeks prior to the previously announced release date of January 13, 2017. A fourth album, RTJ4 was released on June 3, 2020. All of their albums to date have been released for free.


=== Production and featured appearances ===
El-P has contributed productions and guest rhymes to albums by Aesop Rock, Evil Nine, DJ Krush, Murs, Cage, Mr. Lif, Prefuse 73, Del tha Funkee Homosapien, Mike Ladd, The High and Mighty, Jedi Mind Tricks, Aceyalone, Atmosphere, Techno Animal, and Das Racist. He collaborated with Alec Empire on the first Handsome Boy Modeling School album and with Cage and Chino Moreno on the second. He was selected, along with DJ Shadow, to work on Rage Against the Machine frontman Zack de la Rocha's solo album (which never materialized). He has provided remixes for the likes of Beans (of Anti-Pop Consortium), Beck, Blackalicious, Head Automatica, Hot Hot Heat, Dizzee Rascal, Syd Matters, Nine Inch Nails, Push Button Objects, Rob Sonic, TV on the Radio, Lorde, and Yasushilde, among others. El-P provided the soundtrack for the graffiti film Bomb the System.


=== Film scoring ===
El-P was the principal composer for the 2005 film Bomb the System; he was one of the candidates to score a trailer for 2017's Blade Runner 2049, but his score was "rejected or ignored". He created the score for the 2020 biopic Capone.


== Style ==
El-P's rapping style is characterized by dense, aggressive, and verbose attacks that include heavy use of metaphors, sci-fi fantasy themes, pop culture references, and associative wordplay. His lyrics often feature themes found in the works of sci-fi author Philip K. Dick, such as paranoia and questions about the nature of reality. Reviewing his 2002 album Fantastic Damage, critic Steve Huey described El-P as "one of the most technically gifted MCs of his time, spitting out near-impossible phrases and rhythmic variations that simply leave the listener's head spinning".El-P's 2004 album High Water was a radical departure, pitting his beats and production against a jazz band under the direction of pianist Matthew Shipp, a fan of El-P's music. In a 2003 interview with Shipp for Bomb magazine, El-P stated, "First and foremost, I wanted to [make a different album] because it scared the shit out of me. And when I get offered the chance to be involved with something that scares me, I usually do it, because I'm trying to learn, I'm trying to understand music as much as I can, to become a better musician in general and work in different capacities."


== Personal life ==
El-P began dating comedian and musician Emily Panic in 2010, and they married in October 2018. Panic was featured on Killer Mike's 2012 album R.A.P. Music, which El-P produced.


== Discography ==

Studio albumsFantastic Damage (2002)
High Water (2004)
I'll Sleep When You're Dead (2007)
Cancer 4 Cure (2012)


== References ==


== External links ==
Definitive Jux official website
El-P discography at Discogs
El-P at IMDbLouis Eric Barrier (born November 8, 1963) is an American rapper, producer and DJ for the golden age hip hop duo Eric B. & Rakim.Eric B. & Rakim's album Paid in Full was named the greatest hip hop album of all time by MTV in 2006, and the duo were nominated in 2011 for induction into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame.Eric B. has played police officer Mike Gee on the TV series Blue Bloods since 2019.


== Life ==
Eric B. was born on November 8, 1963 in East Elmhurst, Queens. He attended William Cullen Bryant High School under a basketball scholarship. "I thought of becoming a pro ball player," he said. "But music became a priority."


=== Music career ===
Eric B. started deejaying with his younger brother and two friends at a roller rink. He cites deejays such as DJ Vernon, King Charles, and Grandmaster Flash as early influences, recalling: "I remember sneaking out to the armories at night, sneaking out to the parties at St. Gabriel School on Astoria Boulevard". By 1985, Eric B. worked as a DJ at the New York radio station WBLS; there, he sought to find an artist to rap over his DJing, which led him to meet Rakim. Eric B. had also considered work with Freddie Foxxx, but was unable to successfully meet with him before forming his partnership with Rakim.Eric B. and Rakim released their first single, "Eric B. Is President," in 1986. Eric B. included an uncredited sample of James Brown's "Funky President" on the track, which led Brown to sue the duo, in one of the earliest court cases related to sampling in hip-hop. The duo then went on to release their debut album, Paid in Full, in 1987. This album was highly acclaimed immediately upon its release, and has come to be regarded as one of the greatest albums in hip-hop history; Eric B. has been praised for his "martial and percussive" production and effective use of samples on the album.After three more albums, Eric B. and Rakim's record contract with MCA came to a close. Concerned that Rakim might abandon him, Eric B. refused to sign the release contract, leading to a protracted legal battle between him, Rakim, and the label. This situation led the duo to split up completely in 1992. After separating from Rakim, Eric B. released one solo album – 1995's Eric B. – but primarily worked as a producer and executive for Street Life Records, a now-defunct subsidiary of Scotti Brothers Records.Eric B. and Rakim fell out of contact after they ceased to collaborate musically, but in 2016, they reconnected and announced their reunion. The duo has once again begun holding concerts, and is working on remastering their albums, but indicated that they were not planning to release new music.


=== Other ventures ===
In addition to music, Eric B. has been involved in movie production, and worked as a consultant for The Source Awards. He also owns several restaurants throughout the United States.


== Musical style ==
Eric B. is noted for his sparse production style; a New York Times review of Follow the Leader described him as a "minimalist virtuoso." Jonathan Gold of the Los Angeles Times has described Eric B.'s beats as "chill" and "understated", while AllMusic describes them as "stripped-down." In a more critical appraisal, Mark Jenkins of The Washington Post described Eric B.'s work on Paid in Full as "monotonous".Eric B. is also credited with being one of the first hip-hop producers to make extensive use of soul samples in his music; for instance, he samples heavily from James Brown's "Funky President" and Fonda Rae's "Over Like a Fat Rat" in his debut single with Rakim, "Eric B. Is President."


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===
Eric B. (1995)


=== with Rakim ===
Paid in Full (1987)
Follow the Leader (1988)
Let the Rhythm Hit 'Em (1990)
Don't Sweat the Technique (1992)


== Personal life ==
Eric B. spent two weeks in jail in 2019 over his failure to show up to a 2002 sentencing in New Jersey related to his pleading guilty to eluding arrest and aggravated assault for an incident in 2001. At the 2002 sentencing, Eric B. was sentenced to 364 days in jail, which he did not complete. According to Eric B., he had been instructed by his lawyer in the 2002 case, Paul Bergrin, that he did not have to appear in the sentencing. In 2019, a judge sentenced him to a year of probation instead of prison.


== References ==Seamus Padraic Ryan (born July 24, 1978), better known by his stage name Esoteric, is a Boston-based underground hip-hop artist. Esoteric is half of the hip hop duo 7L & Esoteric, a third of Czarface and is a member of underground hip-hop collectives Army of the Pharaohs and Demigodz. He started his solo career in 2007.


== Career ==


=== 1993-1996: Early career and "7L & Esoteric" ===
The duo formed in 1993 when Esoteric DJed a hip hop show at a college radio station, WMWM 91.7FM north of Boston. 7L, a DJ and producer who listened to the show, contacted Esoteric in the interest of collaborating. The two found they shared a common love of the golden age of hip-hop and decided to form a group.
After performing for some time in the Boston/Cambridge underground, the duo released their first single in 1996 as God Complex with MC Karma. The b-side "Secret Wars" gained a lot of attention as Esoteric paid tribute to the heroes of Marvel Comics in rhyme form. This led to the release of the Rebel Alliance LP, featuring acts such as Virtuoso, Mr. Lif, and Force Five. Also at this time the two dropped the God Complex moniker becoming simply 7L & Esoteric.


=== 1997-1999: Rebel Alliance & Army of the Pharaohs ===
Soon after, 7L & Esoteric put out their first 12" with re-mastered versions of their Rebel Alliance songs "Protocol" and "Be Alert." "Be Alert", the B-side on the record, began to receive significant radio play, due to its unique sampling of the Transformers' TV theme song. The track, which was produced by Beyonder, became very popular in the underground scene, leading the duo to several European tours, major label interest, and becoming one of the first New England hip-hop acts to appear on the world-famous Stretch & Bobbito WKCR radio show in NYC and get spins on the Wake Up Show with MTV's Sway & King Tech. URB Magazine had chosen 7L & Esoteric for their "Next 100" issue in 1997.
The duo then dropped the "Def Rhymes" single though Landspeed Distribution which earned them press in the Source. "Def Rhymes" was also featured on the EP, Speaking Real Words, released in 1999. The album also featured Wu-Tang Clan member Inspectah Deck on the title track. During promotion for the 12", Esoteric had spent time in Philadelphia and formed the supergroup Army of the Pharaohs with Jedi Mind Tricks frontman Vinnie Paz. Esoteric would appear three times on Jedi Mind Tricks breakthrough album Violent By Design in 2000.


=== 2000-2005: The Soul Purpose & DC2: Bars of Death ===
7L & Esoteric released their debut LP The Soul Purpose in the summer of 2001. The single, "Call Me ES" charted at #83 on Billboard hip-hop singles. The album received the Boston Music Award for "Best Hip-Hop Album," and led to the duo headlining tours of the United States and Europe. Upon their return, they recorded and released their second LP in the fall of 2002 titled Dangerous Connection featuring Jedi Mind Tricks' Stoupe, Vinnie Paz, J-Live, Apathy, and others.
After taking a break from recording the duo released their third LP DC2: Bars of Death in the spring of 2004 with Babygrande Records. The album received overall positive reviews and was lauded by long-time fans. In 2006, Esoteric compiled an album entitled "Moment of Rarities" which was also released with Babygrande. This CD was a collection of previously unreleased tracks. Esoteric featured on John Cena's album You Can't See Me on the track "BeanTown".


=== 2006-2007: Solo career start ===
After A New Dope Esoteric embarked on a solo venture. In October 2007 he presented his debut Egoclapper on his own label Fly Casual Records, in which he took both the rhyming and production duties. A Limited Edition version was also available, packaged with bonus CD Esoteric Vs Gary Numan: Pterodactyl Tubeway. This featured Esoteric both rhyming and producing beats heavily sampling 1980s Electro icon Gary Numan.
He has also sparked some comedic video entertainment with his YouTube series Pterovision which served as a bi-weekly broadcast to the 7LES fan base. The series was initially released as a buildup to the release of Egoclapper.


=== 2008-2010: Esoteric vs. Japan, Prison Planet and Saving Seamus Ryan ===
On May 8, 2008, Esoteric released another solo venture, entitled Esoteric vs. Japan - Pterodactyl Takes Tokyo. This release featured Esoteric rhyming over beats sampled from Japanese music, TV and films, such as Godzilla, Gaiking, Force Five, Shogun Warriors and Rodan.
Esoteric's next collaboration was with rapper Tha Trademarc and producer DC the Midi Alien. Together they form the group East Coast Avengers. Their debut album, Prison Planet, was released October 7, 2008, on underground rap label Brick Records. The album's lead single, "Kill Bill O'Reilly," quickly gained notoriety for its abrasive lyrics, and the metaphorical murder of the right wing American television/radio host, Bill O'Reilly, and former guest commentator, Michelle Malkin. Following responses by Malkin another single was released, "Dear Michelle". MySpace, owned by O'Reilly's employers Fox, has censored the songs and taken down related graphics as they were deemed too offensive. Keith Olbermann had featured their track on MSNBC during his show Countdown as the presidential race was heating up.
On February 10, 2009, Esoteric released his first solo instrumental album, Serve or Suffer which was dedicated to Marvel Comics' unsung artist Jack Kirby and was featured in the Jack Kirby Museum and the New York Comic Con.
Esoteric released Saving Seamus Ryan on September 22, 2009, which featured dialogue created from sampling Harrison Ford's voice speaking to him throughout the entire album to tell a story. The CD came with a "short story" bundled in hardcover book with 50 pages. This is basically the lyrics with some extra content. The story goes from saying goodbye to his dying dog Max, in the first track (Studio Time/Goodbye) to Esoteric's character getting shot and robbed for an engagement ring. As the plot thickens, he joins up with Indie Solo, an odd character who speaks like Harrison Ford and guides Esoteric's career as the two hunt down the jewel thief, fictional character Benny Macko. The story introduces his real life dog Logan, who ultimately inspires him to see the good in the world, an example of art imitating life. The twist at the end of the book/album is that Indie Solo was indeed a figment of Esoteric's imagination.


=== 2010-2013: Boston Pharaoh, The Unholy Terror and Killmatic ===
In 2010, Esoteric released the album Boston Pharaoh to support his European tour with the Army of the Pharaohs. Limited to 500 physical copies, and available only on the European tour, it is still highly sought after and considered very rare. The album was later released on iTunes and Amazon for digital release. The lone single from the album is called "Palin / Vick" and draws comparisons to Sarah Palin and NFL star Michael Vick, citing their affinity for animal cruelty. The song condemns dog-fighting and wolf-hunting, yet also suggests that racism is alive and well in America due to the media's varying portrayal of Palin and Vick, both animal murderers, yet one went to jail for killing dogs and the other repeatedly shot wolves from an airplane and still ran for office.


=== 2013-Present: Czarface ===
Czarface is an American hip hop supergroup formed in 2013 by underground hip hop duo 7L & Esoteric and Wu-Tang Clan member Inspectah Deck. They released their acclaimed debut studio album, Czarface, February 19, 2013.
The album was followed by Every Hero Needs a Villain in 2015 and A Fistful of Peril in 2016, both of which were also praised by critics. In 2018, Czarface released a collaborative album with MF DOOM titled "Czarface vs Metalface".


== Discography ==


=== Solo albums ===
Too Much Posse - Fly Casual Creative 2006
Egoclapper - Fly Casual Creative 2007
Esoteric Vs. Gary Numan - Pterodactyl Tubeway - (giveaway mixtape) 2007
Esoteric Vs. Japan - "Pterodactyl Takes Tokyo" - Fly Casual Creative 2008
Serve or Suffer - Fly Casual Creative 2009
Saving Seamus Ryan - Fly Casual Creative 2009
Fly Casualties (rarities disc) - Fly Casual Creative 2010
Boston Pharaoh (ltd "tour only" edition, only 500 pressed) - Fly Casual Creative 2011
Machete Mode (with Stu Bangas) - Man Bites Dog Records 2013


=== Demigodz ===
Killmatic - Demigodz Records 2013


=== 7L & Esoteric ===
Speaking Real Words EP - Direct Records / Landspeed 1999
The Soul Purpose - Direct Records / Landspeed 2001
Dangerous Connection - Brick Records 2002
DC2: Bars of Death - Babygrande Records 2004
Moment of Rarities - Babygrande Records 2005
A New Dope - Babygrande Records 2006
Dope Not Hype (mixtape, limited pressing) - 2006
1212 - Fly Casual Creative 2010


=== Czarface ===
Czarface - Brick Records 2013
Every Hero Needs a Villain - Brick Records 2015
A Fistful of Peril - Silver Age 2016
First Weapon Drawn - Silver Age 2017
Czarface Meets Metal Face - Silver Age 2018
Czarface Meets Ghostface - Silver Age 2019
Double Dose of Danger - Silver Age 2019
The Odd Czar Against Us - Silver Age 2019
Czar Noir - Silver Age 2021
Super What? - Silver Age 2021
Czarmageddon! - Silver Age 2022


=== Army of the Pharoahs ===
1998: The Five Perfect Exertions EP
2006: The Torture Papers
2007: Ritual of Battle
2010: The Unholy Terror
2014: In Death Reborn
2014: Heavy Lies the Crown


=== East Coast Avengers ===
Prison Planet - Brick Records 2008
See the Bars (EP) - Brick Records, Fly Casual 2008


== References ==Eve Jihan Cooper (née Jeffers; born November 10, 1978) is an American rapper, singer, and actress. In 1999, she released her debut album, Let There Be Eve...Ruff Ryders' First Lady, which reached number one on the Billboard 200, making her the third female rapper to accomplish this feat, and was certified double platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). The album produced the hit singles "What Ya Want", "Love Is Blind", and "Gotta Man". That same year, she was featured on The Roots' Grammy Award-winning single "You Got Me", as well as Missy Elliott's "Hot Boyz", the latter of which peaked within the top ten of the Billboard Hot 100.
Eve's second studio album, Scorpion (2001), peaked in the top ten of the Billboard 200 and was certified platinum by the RIAA. Its single "Let Me Blow Ya Mind", which featured Gwen Stefani, won her and Stefani the inaugural Grammy Award for Best Rap/Sung Collaboration and an MTV Video Music Award, and peaked at number two on the Billboard Hot 100. Her follow-up album, Eve-Olution (2002), also peaked in the top ten of the Billboard 200, and yielded the single "Gangsta Lovin'", which reached number two on the Hot 100. Her other singles from these albums, "Satisfaction" and "Love Is Blind", as well as her 2007 standalone single, "Tambourine", all reached the top 40 of the Hot 100. She was also featured on Gwen Stefani's song "Rich Girl" in 2005, which was certified double platinum by the RIAA and nominated for a Grammy Award. After parting ways with Interscope Records, Eve released Lip Lock (2013), her first independent studio album.
As an actress, she starred as Terri Jones in the comedy drama films Barbershop, Barbershop 2: Back in Business, and Barbershop: The Next Cut, and played the lead role of Shelley Williams on the UPN television sitcom Eve. Eve also had supporting roles in the drama film The Woodsman (2004), the comedy film The Cookout (2004) and the horror film Animal (2014). From 2017 to 2020, she was one of the co-hosts of the CBS Daytime talk show The Talk, for which she earned two Daytime Emmy Award nominations.


== Early life ==
Eve Jihan Jeffers was born in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, the daughter of Julie Wilcher, a publishing company supervisor and Jerry Jeffers, a chemical plant supervisor. Eve lived in West Philadelphia until age 13 when her family moved to the neighborhood of Germantown. She graduated from Martin Luther King High School in Philadelphia.At the age of 18, she worked as a stripper until rapper Mase convinced her to stop stripping. In 1999, Eve discussed stripping in an interview with Rolling Stone, saying "that was a hustle, too; there's a song about it on my album, 'Heaven Only Knows.' But I don't regret it – I was eighteen and confused, going through personal problems. I did it for about a month, and I was glad I did it. It helped me find Eve, helped me get serious. It was depressing – a lot of those girls have three or four kids. I'd sit there and be like, 'Eve, you don't belong here, this is not your world.'" Eve's first musical interest was singing. She sang in many choirs and even formed an all-female singing group (Dope Girl Posse or EDGP) with a manager. This group covered songs from En Vogue and Color Me Badd. The group's manager suggested that they should start rapping, and Eve stuck with it. After the group split up, Eve began working on a solo career under the name "Eve of Destruction".


== Career ==


=== 1998–2001: Beginnings, debut album and breakthrough ===
In 1998, Eve appeared on the Bulworth soundtrack as Eve of Destruction while signed to Dr. Dre's record label Aftermath Entertainment. She appeared on DMX's song "Ruff Ryders' Anthem" (Remix) from his album It's Dark and Hell Is Hot and The Roots' single "You Got Me" from the band's fourth album Things Fall Apart. Eve also provided background vocals on The Roots' song "Ain't Sayin' Nothin' New" from Things Fall Apart and is credited as Eve of Destruction. Eve's first single "What Y'all Want", featuring Nokio the N-Tity of Dru Hill, was released in June 1999. The song peaked at number 29 on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 chart and at number one on the Hot Rap Songs chart. "What Ya'll Want" was included on the compilation album Ryde or Die Vol. 1 (1999).Her debut album called Let There Be Eve...Ruff Ryders' First Lady was released on September 14, 1999, by Ruff Ryders Entertainment and Interscope Records. It sold 213,000 copies in the first week. The album has sold over 2 million copies (according to SoundScan) and is certified Double Platinum. The album features singles such as "Gotta Man" and "Love Is Blind". "Love Is Blind" was written when she was 16 and based on her 17-year-old best friend's relationship with a 35-year-old abusive man by whom she became pregnant. All of the songs on the album were written by Eve herself. Eve became the third female hip-hop artist to have her album peak at number one on the Billboard 200 (Lauryn Hill's debut album, The Miseducation of Lauryn Hill, being the first to top the chart in 1998 and Foxy Brown's second album, Chyna Doll achieving the feat earlier in 1999). In November 1999, Eve was featured on Missy Elliott's single "Hot Boyz (Remix)" along with Nas, Lil Mo, and Q-Tip. The remix broke the record for most weeks at number-one on the US R&B chart on the issue dated January 15, 2000; as well as spending 18 weeks at number one on the Hot Rap Singles from December 4, 1999, to March 25, 2000.Eve does not like being referred to as a "Pop Princess." 
Her second studio album Scorpion, was released on March 6, 2001. She appeared on the cover of Jet magazine, which referred to her as the "Queen of Rap". The album's first single, "Who's That Girl" peaked at number 47 on the Billboard Hot 100 and number six in the United Kingdom. It was also number 97 on VH1's 100 Greatest Songs of Hip Hop. The second single, "Let Me Blow Ya Mind" with Gwen Stefani of No Doubt, peaked at number two on the Billboard Hot 100 and number one on the US Mainstream Top 40 chart. It won a Grammy Award in 2002 for Best Rap/Sung Collaboration, which was a brand new category at the time. The song was listed at number seven on the 2001 Pazz & Jop list, a survey of several hundred music critics conducted by Robert Christgau. A remix of "Love Is Blind" featuring singer Faith Evans also appeared on the album. In 2001, Eve won the BET Award for Best Female Hip-Hop Artist. In November 2001, she appeared as a contestant on the game show Who Wants to Be a Millionaire and won $32,000 for her charity.


=== 2002–2012: Eve-Olution, collaborations and acting roles ===

Eve's third album, Eve-Olution, was released by Ruff Ryders Entertainment on August 27, 2002, and peaked at number six on the Billboard 200. The album's first single, "Gangsta Lovin'", with Alicia Keys, became her second consecutive number-two hit on the Billboard Hot 100, as well as her third consecutive top ten hit in the United Kingdom. The second single, "Satisfaction" was moderately successful in the United States, reaching number 27 and 22 on the Billboard Hot 100 and R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart. Eve-Olution has sold over 500,000 copies in the U.S. and was certified gold in sales by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). In 2002, Eve appeared on the remixed version of Michael Jackson's "Butterflies". She appeared in the action film XXX (2002) and all three Barbershop films (Barbershop, Barbershop 2: Back in Business, and Barbershop: The Next Cut). In 2003, Eve starred as a fashion designer called Shelly Williams in the television sitcom, Eve. The show followed two sets of male and female friends attempting to navigate relationships with the opposite sex. The show aired for three seasons on UPN from September 15, 2003, to May 11, 2006. Eve guest starred as Yvette Powell in an episode of NBC's crime drama television series Third Watch. In 2004, she appeared in two films, The Woodsman and The Cookout.In 2005, she appeared on Gwen Stefani's song "Rich Girl", which peaked at number seven on the Billboard Hot 100 in March. In the United States, "Rich Girl" was certified gold, and it received a nomination for Best Rap/Sung Collaboration at the 47th Grammy Awards. The same year, she appeared on the official remix of Amerie's number one U.S. R&B single, "1 Thing". She also appeared on Keyshia Cole's single "Never" and Teairra Mari's official remix for "No Daddy". In 2007, Eve appeared on Kelly Rowland's single "Like This" which reached the top-ten in Ireland and the United Kingdom,  the top-twenty in Australia and New Zealand, as well as number 30 on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart. In July 2007, Eve made a guest appearance on Maroon 5's second single "Wake Up Call" on Live 45th at Night. In late 2008, she performed "Set It On Fire", which became available on the Transporter 3 soundtrack. In April 2009, Eve and Lil Jon appeared on the song "Patron Tequila", the debut single of girl group Paradiso Girls.She played Ophelia Franklin in the British drama film Flashbacks of a Fool (2008). In 2009, she landed a role as Rosa Sparks in the comedy-drama film Whip It, opposite Elliot Page and Drew Barrymore. It received generally positive reviews from critics but did not perform well financially, having made $16.6 million worldwide against its $15 million budget. Also in 2009, she portrayed La-La Buendia in an episode of CBS' crime drama series Numbers and appeared in two episodes of Fox's musical comedy-drama series Glee, appearing as Grace Hitchens. She portrayed Latisha in the crime thriller film 4.3.2.1. (2010) alongside Emma Roberts and Tamsin Egerton. Eve hosted the 2010 MTV Africa Music Awards.In March 2010, Eve was featured on the official remix of Ludacris' song "My Chick Bad". In November 2010, Eve performed a rap on Australian singer Guy Sebastian's single "Who's That Girl", which reached number one on the ARIA Singles Chart and has been certified 4× Platinum. In December 2010, Eve was featured on Alicia Keys' song "Speechless", which charted at number 71 on the US Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart in early 2011. In March 2011, Eve was featured on Swizz Beatz' song "Everyday (Coolin')", the first promotional single from his upcoming album Haute Living. In April 2011, she appeared on Jill Scott's song "Shame" from her album The Light of the Sun. She also appeared on Russian rapper Timati's new single "Money In Da Bank" and Wolfgang Gartner's song "Get Em". In April 2012, Eve appeared on reggae artist Shaggy's single "Girls Just Wanna Have Fun".


=== 2013–2015: Lip Lock and label change ===
In 2007, Eve began working on a new album titled Lip Lock. Five of the album's songs were produced by Swizz Beatz, including the singles "Tambourine" and "Give It to You" (featuring Sean Paul). "Tambourine" debuted at number 73 on the Billboard Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart in the week of April 19, 2007. In the United Kingdom, the song debuted at number 38, two weeks before the song's physical release. "Tambourine" peaked at number 18 there and was her fifth consecutive top twenty solo hit in the UK. The song peaked at number 68 on Rolling Stone's list of the 100 Best Songs of 2007, and was placed at number 70 on MTV Asia's list of Top 100 Hits of 2007. Pharrell Williams produced the song "All Night Long", in which Eve sings rather than raps. The album ran into a series of delays due to corporate change at the record label and discontent with the lackluster success of the singles.
The album was renamed twice from "Here I Am" to "Flirt" to "Lip Lock". After Eve left Interscope Records and signed with EMI, Lip Lock was expected to be released in 2011, but it was delayed again. In 2012, Eve decided to release the album as an independent artist, and stated that there will be several buzz singles before the official single release. In an interview with Billboard, Eve stated that "one of the biggest things that I wanted to do on this album was make people realize why they fell in love with me in the first place and then take them on a journey to where I am now musically. My ear is different but I think people will recognize me. I think you'll hear that I'm in a happy place. I miss my music. My hunger is different than the first time around". On October 9, 2012, Eve released a promotional single titled "She Bad Bad" on iTunes. In November 2012, Eve released a series of weekly remixes on YouTube called EVEstlin' Tuesdays, in which she added freestyle rap verses on 2012 hit singles, such as Rihanna's "Diamonds" and Miguel's "Adorn".The album's first official single, "Make It Out This Town", featuring Gabe Saporta of Cobra Starship was released on February 23, 2013. In an interview with Rap-Up TV, Eve confirmed that the second official single would be "Eve" featuring Jamaican reggae artist Miss Kitty. The music video for the song was shot in London in February 2013 and premiered on BET on April 29, 2013. On May 14, 2013, Lip Lock was released under her own label From The Rib Music and distributed through Sony/RED. The album debuted at number 46 on the Billboard 200 chart. The album features collaborations with Juicy J, Dawn Richards, Claude Kelly, Pusha T, Chrisette Michele, Nacho, Gabe Saporta, Propaine, Missy Elliott, and Snoop Dogg. She appeared in the post-apocalyptic action comedy Bounty Killer (2013) and the horror thriller film Animal (2014). In 2014, Eve appeared in two episodes of the Oxygen reality television series Sisterhood of Hip Hop. She portrayed Amaya in Lifetime's romantic comedy television film With This Ring (2015) alongside Jill Scott and Regina Hall.


=== 2016–present: Television projects ===
In April 2016, it was announced that Eve would join Gwen Stefani on her This Is What the Truth Feels Like Tour. The tour began on July 12, 2016, in Mansfield, Massachusetts at the Xfinity Center and continued throughout North America before concluding on October 16, 2016, in Inglewood, California at The Forum. In 2016, she hosted VH1's annual event Hip Hop Honors, which honors old school and golden age hip hop rappers and contributors for their long-term influence and importance in the history of hip hop culture. In 2017, she portrayed Cecile James in two episodes of VH1's satirical comedy-drama television series Daytime Divas. On November 14, 2017, Eve became a co-host of the CBS Daytime talk show, The Talk, replacing Aisha Tyler. In 2018, she appeared in several television shows, including Jane the Virgin, Empire, Celebrity Family Feud, and Happy Together.On July 12, 2019, Eve released her first single in six years titled "Reload", featuring Jamaican dancehall artist Konshens. In November 2019, Eve and Gwen Stefani performed "Rich Girl" on NBC's competition series The Voice. The special performance celebrated Stefani's debut solo album's 15th anniversary. Eve hosted the 47th annual Daytime Emmy Awards with Sharon Osbourne, Sheryl Underwood, Carrie Ann Inaba, and Marie Osmond on June 26, 2020. She received a second Daytime Emmy Award nomination for Outstanding Entertainment Talk Show Host along with her The Talk co-stars in 2020.  On the November 2, 2020, episode of The Talk, Eve announced that she would be leaving the show at the end of the year due to the impending lockdown restrictions preventing her from returning to the US, and plans to expand her current family.
On March 6, 2021, Eve released a 20th anniversary re-release of her album Scorpion with four new remixes. On June 16, 2021, Eve and Trina battled in the webcast series Verzuz.On March 8, 2021, it was announced that Eve was to join the cast of American Broadcasting Company's music series Queens, alongside Naturi Naughton and Brandy. In May 2021, it was announced the show was being picked up for a full series, followed by the first official trailer, released on May 18, 2021. On October 1, 2021, the first promo single from Queens (“Nasty Girl")
was released featuring Eve alongside the cast: Brandy, Naturi Naughton and Nadine Velazquez. A music video, directed by Tim Story, was released on the same day. This was followed on October 18, 2021, by another rap song from the Queens  soundtrack: “The Introduction”, which was co-written by Nas. Queens debuted on October 19, 2021, and reviews were largely positive; Caroline Framke for Variety praised the quartet's musical offering, calling their raps “sharp and distinct […] making clear their talent as both individuals and a swaggering collective”. Angie Han for The Hollywood Reporter called the show “Impressive […] lavish […] magic”. The show was cancelled in early 2022 after one season.


== Other ventures ==
Eve has appeared in music videos throughout her career. She has graced the covers of numerous magazines, including Essence, Teen People, Allure, Rolling Stone, Paper, Philadelphia Style, Giant, Blaze, Vibe, Inked, XXL, and Ebony. She has also appeared in television commercials for Clarica, Pepsi, and Sprite. Her print ads include Tommy Hilfiger and MAC Cosmetics' Viva Glam campaign.In 2003, Eve launched a clothing line titled Fetish which was targeted towards black women. Fetish was discontinued in September 2009.


== Personal life ==
Eve divides her time between London, Los Angeles and New York. She began dating Maximillion Cooper in 2010. The couple became engaged on December 25, 2013, and married on June 14, 2014, in Ibiza, Spain. Eve has four stepchildren, all from Cooper's previous marriage to businesswoman Julie Brangstrup. In October 2021, Eve announced she was expecting her first child with Cooper, due in February. Eve and Cooper welcomed their first child, a son, on February 1, 2022.


== Discography ==

Studio albumsLet There Be Eve...Ruff Ryders' First Lady (1999)
Scorpion (2001)
Eve-Olution (2002)
Lip Lock (2013)


== Concert tours ==


=== Headlining ===
Lip Lock Tour (2013)


=== Co-headlining tour ===
Ruff Ryders-Cash Money Tour (2000)
Total Request Live Tour (2001)
Ruff Ryders 20th Anniversary Tour (2017)


=== Opening act ===
Ja Rule Tour (2003)
This Is What the Truth Feels Like Tour (2016)


== Filmography ==


=== Film ===


=== Television ===


=== Appearances and reality television ===


=== Video games ===


== Awards and nominations ==


== References ==


== External links ==

Archive of Eve official website
Eve at IMDbMichael Gene Dionne (born September 4, 1985), better known by his stage name Eyenine, is an American hip hop recording artist from Dover, New Hampshire.
Eyenine began writing and recording music at the age of 16, being heavily inspired by acts including Eyedea, Sage Francis, Adeem and Atmosphere. In his twenties, Eyenine began touring the country with such acts as PT Burnem, Paulie Think, Ecid, Prhym8 and Farout. He helped found an upstart recording label called Flyrock Records which released multiple albums from various New England artists including The If In Life, Rio Bravo, The Nasty and others. After years of freestyling at the weekly Rap Night in Portland, Maine he entered and won two separate Ruckus Cup Classic battle tournaments. He also went on to win two separate Church of Providence battle tournaments hosted by B. Dolan and refereed by Sage Francis and later came out of battle rap retirement to win the first ever Overcast battle championship in Cincinnati, OH, the birthplace of the Scribble Jam, in 2018. Eyenine is currently under Real Hood Music LLC, a brand of Wu Tang Management and has shared stages with artists such as RZA and GZA.


== Career ==
Eyenine began his career in New Hampshire doing local shows around the area. He was one of the founding members of the label Flyrock Records, which released multiple albums and hosted shows in the New England area. Eyenine and Flyrock Records were featured in an episode of Chronicle. He was able to work with his biggest influence, Eyedea before his untimely passing on his album Afraid to Dream. After two full length releases, he began touring the nation and building up a fanbase which eventually caught the attention of the legendary RZA of the Wu Tang Clan. RZA invited Eyenine to join him on the Major Motion Picture Soundtrack tour for The Man with the Iron Fists across the country from Brooklyn, New York City to Los Angeles, California. Since then, Eyenine released his third studio album, Dissembler in 2013, toured with GZA, and has done multiple shows with Ghostface Killah, U-God, Raekwon, Killah Priest and many others.
In May 2019, after a five year hiatus, Eyenine teamed up with The Lonely Ghosts to release a full length titled A Reason for Departure which features a marked difference in sound and style from his earlier solo ventures. Eyenine is in the process of recording his fourth solo studio album, titled A Little Above Low Key, being produced by El Shupacabra and features such artists as Ceschi, Witness, Adeem and more. The album is set to be released, after major delays due to COVID-19, in the first quarter of 2021.


== Touring ==
Eyenine has done many tours over the course of his career, ranging from self funded DIY tours to Major Motion Picture Soundtrack tours such as “The Man With the Iron Fists” alongside Rza, U-God, Supernatural and more. He has performed at SXSW multiple years and continues to reach new places each tour. Recently, he has toured the country with fellow acts ECID and Farout multiple times and plans to continue the trend into 2019 in support of his fourth studio album, A Little Above Low Key.


== Personal life ==
Eyenine is an avid fan of anime, video games, Brazilian Jiu Jitsu and playing music of various genres in multiple collaboration projects and bands. He also hosts multiple events around New Hampshire, including various shows of multiple genres and also open mic comedy events.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===
the insomnia sessions (2009)
afraid to dream (2011)
Dissembler (2013)
A Reason for Departure (2019)


=== Non-studio albums ===
$ece$$ion split w/The If in Life (2007)
free music (2010)
the narcolepsy sessions (2014)


=== Guest appearances ===
"Week by Week" by Micodin and Dynamo-P on Let the Sleepers Sleep (2011)
"Don't Know My High" by Ecid, Prhym8 and Eyenine on Fill in the Breaks: File Under Blood Shot (2013)
"Interpretive Rants" by Ecid on Post Euphoria (Vol 1 & 2) Deluxe (2013)
"Arachnophobia/We're Alive (Live)" by Eyenine and The Fogcutters on Big Band Syndrome, Vol. 2 (2013)
"Wasted (Live)" by Eyenine and The Fogcutters on Big Band Syndrome, Vol. 2 (2013)
"Fire Like This" by Sea Level on Sea Level (2014)
"Turning" by Ill By Instinct on Ill-Advised (2015)
"Quite a Man" by Ill by Instinct feat. Mad Dukes & MC22 on Ill-Advised (2015)
"The Misinformation Age" by Ben Shorr on Live & Direct (2016)
"Pretty OK" by Two Story ft. Seth on Gray on Overly Optimistic (2016)
"Buy Weapons" by Juan Cosby on Inhospitable Planet (2017)
"Say It Again " by Ben Shorr feat. Jarv on Pyrokinesis (2017)
"Say Nothing" by Shane Reis feat. God.Damn.Chan & Kenya Hall on VEIB (2018)
"Made to End" by Happy Tooth feat. Bum Theory on I've Been Meaning to Write the Meaning of Life (2018)


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Real Hood Music LLC websiteJohn David Jackson (born November 18, 1977), better known by his stage name Fabolous, is an American rapper. Raised in Brooklyn, he first gained recognition while still a senior in high school, when he performed live on American music executive DJ Clue's radio show, then on Hot 97. Jackson subsequently signed to DJ Clue's Desert Storm imprint, and later secured a distribution deal with major-label, Elektra. Jackson gained prominence with his first release, Ghetto Fabolous (2001), which spawned the hit singles "Can't Deny It" (featuring Nate Dogg) and "Young'n (Holla Back)". His second release was 2003's Street Dreams, which was supported by two US top 10 singles, "Can't Let You Go" (featuring Lil' Mo) and "Into You" (featuring Tamia or Ashanti).
Including the aforementioned songs, Jackson's series of hit singles extended throughout the 2000s, including "Trade It All, Pt. 2" (featuring Diddy and Jagged Edge), "Breathe", "Make Me Better" (featuring Ne-Yo), "Baby Don't Go" (featuring T-Pain), "Throw It in the Bag" (featuring The-Dream) and "You Be Killin' Em". He is also known for his appearances on several R&B singles, including "Superwoman Pt. II" by Lil' Mo, "Shawty Is a 10" by The-Dream, "Addiction" by Ryan Leslie, "She Got Her Own" by Jamie Foxx, and "Say Aah" by Trey Songz, among others.
In 2004, Jackson signed to Atlantic Records (another subsidiary of Warner Music Group), after leaving Elektra, where he released Real Talk, his first and only album under Atlantic. In 2006, Jackson was let out of his contract with Atlantic and officially signed with Def Jam Recordings (owned by Warner competitor Universal Music Group). Also in 2006, Jackson founded his own record label, Street Family Records. In 2007, he released From Nothin' to Somethin', under Def Jam. In 2009, he released his fifth album, Loso's Way. Throughout the years, Jackson has amassed a number of self-released mixtapes, including several installments of his highly acclaimed There Is No Competition series and The S.O.U.L. Tape series. He released his sixth album, The Young OG Project, in 2014.


== Life and career ==


=== 1977–2000: Early life and career beginnings ===
Fabolous was born John David Jackson on November 18, 1977, and is of Dominican and African-American descent. He grew up in Breevort Houses in the Bedford-Stuyvesant neighborhood of the Brooklyn borough of New York City.Jackson attended High School of Art & Design and City-As-School High School in Manhattan, and eventually Boys and Girls High School in Bed-Stuy. While in his senior year of high school, Jackson began to pursue a career in hip hop music. In the early years of his career, he rapped under the name Fabolous Sport, in reference to Ralph Lauren's Polo Sport line, however this was later shortened to simply Fabolous. The misspelling was unintentional; Jackson originally intended to be simply called "Fabulous" but incorrectly spelled it during a freestyle and it stuck. He was invited to rap live on American record producer and music executive DJ Clue's radio show, then on New York City radio station Hot 97. Fabolous and N.O.R.E. rapped over the instrumental to The Lox's Money, Power & Respect, and DJ Clue subsequently signed Fabolous to his record label, Desert Storm Records. Fabolous was then featured on several DJ Clue mixtapes, as well as mixtapes with Roc-A-Fella artists. This earned Fabolous and Desert Storm a distribution deal with Elektra Records. In a September 6, 2001, interview with Hot104.com, Fabolous said he never planned on becoming a rapper and told the website: "I was just trying to make some money, ya know? I got tired of being broke. This was something where I could make some money. It just happened for me."


=== 2001–2003: Ghetto Fabolous and Street Dreams ===
Fabolous released his debut album, Ghetto Fabolous, on September 11, 2001.  It debuted at number four on the Billboard 200, selling over 140,000 copies in its first week. The album's first single, "Can't Deny It",  was produced by Rick Rock and features a chorus by Nate Dogg interpolating Tupac Shakur's song "Ambitionz Az a Ridah". It charted on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart, along with two of the subsequent singles. The other charting singles were "Young'n (Holla Back)", which was produced by The Neptunes and "Trade It All", which features vocals from Jagged Edge and was produced by DJ Clue and Duro.
Fabolous released his second album Street Dreams on March 4, 2003. Powered by a Just Blaze beat and guest vocals from Lil' Mo and Mike Shorey, "Can't Let You Go" reached number one on the Rhythmic Top 40 chart and number four on the Billboard Hot 100 chart. "Into You" with Tamia also reached number four on the Billboard Hot 100. Also released on Street Dreams was the lead single club banger "This Is My Party" and "Trade It All Pt. 2" which featured Jagged Edge as it did on the Ghetto Fabolous version, as well as Diddy.
Exactly seven months later, on November 4, 2003, Fabolous dropped his official mixtape, More Street Dreams, Pt. 2: The Mixtape. It was an official release by his record label, Elektra. The album featured remixes and tracks not originally on Street Dreams. This album was also an outlet for his three-man crew, known as the Triangle Offense, consisting of himself, Paul Cain, and Joe Budden. The album actually features a remix to song Fire, which was originally on Joe Budden's self-titled debut album.


=== 2004–2008: Real Talk and From Nothin' to Somethin' ===
Fabolous' third album Real Talk was released on November 5, 2004. It debuted at number six on the Billboard 200 with 179,000 copies and had two charting singles, the lowest in his career. The two charting singles are his street anthem "Breathe" and "Baby," which features Mike Shorey, and shows his more sensitive side that he has shown on many songs in the past. His second single was not promoted until weeks after the album's release. "Tit 4 Tat" was his third single. Pharrell of The Neptunes produced it and did the hook. Fab feels that the single didn't hit it as big as it should have due to poor advertising. Making the music video for his fourth single, "Do the Damn Thing" cost Jackson $30,000. The song featured Young Jeezy, who became known to the public through the video. The same year, Fabolous was nominated for a Grammy Award for his collaboration on the "Dip It Low" remix by Christina Milian. Fabolous stated in 2004 that he wanted to release his own clothing line. The line called "Rich Yung Society" was launched in 2006.In early 2006, Fabolous was let out of his contract with Atlantic and officially signed a recording contract with Def Jam Recordings, after a de facto trade that sent Def Jam artist Musiq, to Atlantic.His fourth studio album, From Nothin' to Somethin, was released in June 2007. Fabolous took the number one spot on Billboard's Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums and Top Rap Albums charts for the first time in his career and it debuted at number two on the Billboard 200, selling 159,000 copies in its first week. The album was certified Gold in July 2007. It is his first album on Def Jam Recordings. He was featured on the cover of video game Def Jam: Icon.
The first single and video, "Diamonds", features Young Jeezy who also appeared on the Real Talk track "Do the Damn Thing". Lil Wayne and Remy Ma are featured on the remix. His second single was "Return of the Hustle" which featured Swizz Beatz, also came out before the album release, to some acclaim, but little airplay. His third single though, "Make Me Better," which features fellow Def Jam artist Ne-Yo, and is produced by Timbaland, was his biggest hit to date, spending 14 weeks at number one on the Hot Rap Track Billboard Chart. The fourth single was "Baby Don't Go." Jermaine Dupri produced it and T-Pain sings the hook. However, in music video version of the song, Jermaine Dupri sings the hook. This song also found success, reaching number four on the Hot Rap Track Chart.


=== 2009–2010: Loso's Way ===
Fabolous released his fifth studio album, Loso's Way, in July 2009. The album is based on the 1993 film Carlito's Way, similar to Jay-Z's American Gangster. The first official single is "Throw It in the Bag", featuring The-Dream, and is produced by Christopher "Tricky" Stewart. The second single is "My Time", featuring Jeremih, and is produced by The Runners and Kevin "KC" Cossom. The third single is "Everything, Everyday, Everywhere", featuring Keri Hilson, and is produced by Ryan Leslie. The album debuted at number one on the Billboard 200, selling 99,000 copies in its first week. It became Fabolous' first album to top the chart. In its second week of sales, the album dropped 8 spots from #1 to #9, selling 37,000 copies. A deluxe album was released on the same day as the standard release. The edition features a bonus DVD, ("Loso's Way" the movie). The movie features Fabolous (and three other of his friends). Fabolous is leaving a restaurant when he is shot. His three friends quickly rush Fabolous to the hospital, but are stopped by the police after running a red light. Fellow rapper Styles P has a role in the movie. DJ Clue, DJ Khaled, Jadakiss, Swizz Beatz, DJ Envy, and Ryan Leslie make cameo appearances. The movie "Loso's Way" runs for 33:03 minutes. In order to view "Loso's Way", the deluxe album "Loso's Way" must be purchased. In September 2009, Fabolous was ranked number eight on MTV's Hottest MC in the Game list. In an interview on December 10, 2009, with MTV, he announced that he would be releasing part two to his mixtape series with DJ Drama entitled: "There is No Competition – Part 2: The Funeral Service." Fabolous announced that it would be released on Christmas Day as a gift to his fans. He then pushed back the release date multiple times via Twitter before he and DJ Drama finally released the mixtape online on March 4, 2010.


=== 2010–2014: There Is No Competition series and The Soul Tape series ===

On March 5, 2010, Fabolous released There Is No Competition 2: The Funeral Service, his fourth solo mixtape and the sequel to 2008's There Is No Competition. Due to the popularity of the mixtape, Fabolous re-released it for retail in the form of an extended play (EP) titled There Is No Competition 2: The Grieving Music EP. The EP, which was preceded by the Ryan Leslie-produced single "You Be Killin Em", was released on August 29, 2010. The single peaked at number 68 on the US Billboard Hot 100.
After it was announced that his sixth album would once again be delayed, Fabolous chose to release a new project titled The S.O.U.L. Tape. The mixtape was released on April 22, 2011, and features Fabolous rapping over soul-sampling production, inspired by a freestyle he had done over the instrumental to Kanye West's "Devil in a New Dress". On Christmas Day 2011, Fabolous released There Is No Competition 3: Death Comes in 3's, the third installment in his There Is No Competition mixtape series. On November 22, 2012, Fabolous released his seventh mixtape, The S.O.U.L. Tape 2. The S.O.U.L. Tape 2 featured guest appearances from Trey Songz, Pusha T, Cassie, J. Cole, Wale and Joe Budden. The mixtape's production was handled by Streetrunner, Treddy da Don, AraabMuzik and Cardiak, among others, and follows the theme of the first album by utilising heavy usage of soul samples throughout.In late 2012, Fabolous announced his sixth album, then-titled Loso's Way 2: Rise to Power, would be released in 2013.  The first official single from Loso's Way 2, "Ready" featuring singer Chris Brown was released on January 17, 2013. The second single "When I Feel Like It" featuring 2 Chainz was released on July 9, 2013. In an interview Fabolous revealed the list of features included Trey Songz, Ne-Yo, FYUTCH, Rick Ross, and Young Jeezy and stated that the album was about him "evolving and growing as a person, as a man, as an artist, as a father, as a friend." Loso's Way 2 was scheduled to be released in 2013 by Desert Storm and Def Jam, however, the album was delayed all year long and subsequently rescheduled for release in 2014. On July 30, 2014, Fabolous announced that the lead single from the album would be released by "the end of summer" and would again feature Chris Brown. He stated that "Ready" was just a "warmup record" for this song and that it would be very melodic.


=== 2014–present: The Young OG Project series, Summertime Shootout series, and collab album with Jadakiss ===
On August 22, 2014, Fabolous announced that his much delayed sixth studio album had been renamed to Young OG. This was later changed to The Young OG Project. On December 1, 2014, Fabolous announced the release date for The Young OG Project to be December 25, 2014, with the announcement posted on his new Keek page. Speaking to MTV, Fabolous said the album would be  "very '90s-inspired and '90s themed.". On the same day of the album release announcement, Roc Nation announced Fabolous had signed a management deal. The Young OG Project was released on Christmas Day 2014 and debuted at number 12 on the Billboard 200 chart, with first-week sales of 71,000 copies in the United States.In October 2015, Fabolous confirmed that he would be releasing two new projects by the end of the year, announcing one of them would follow the trend set by There Is No Competition 2 and The Young OG Project by releasing on Christmas Day. On November 26, Fabolous released the free mixtape Summertime Shootout, and announced the second installment of The Young OG Project for December 25, however, it has since been delayed indefinitely.On February 29, 2016, Fabolous and Jadakiss announced that work had begun on their first collaborative project, a mixtape pre-emptively titled Freddy vs. Jason. On April 2, 2016, they released a freestyle to Future's "Wicked" that they confirmed would appear on the project, which they also announced would not be a mixtape, but a full album. On April 29, 2016, Fabolous worked with K-pop artist Jessica Jung as a featured artist and co-writer on a track titled "Fly", the lead single for her first mini album, With Love, J. On September 3, 2016, Fabolous released the second installment of the Summertime Shootout mixtape series, titled Summertime Shootout 2: The Level Up. On October 31, 2017, the first single off the album "Stand Up" featuring Future. On November 21, 2017, it was announced that the album title was changed to Friday on Elm Street. The album was released on November 24, 2017, and had features from Future, Swizz Beatz, and French Montana.
On July 8, 2018, Fabolous released a single called "Ooh Yeah" featuring Ty Dolla Sign.On October 14, 2019, released a single called "Choosy" featuring Jeremih and Davido.On November 19, 2019, Fabolous released a 30-second trailer on his instagram for Summertime Shootout 3: Coldest Summer Ever along with its release date, confirming that it would be released November 29, 2019. A week later, the tracklist and the cover art were released for the album and it was also confirmed to be the final installment of the Summertime Shootout series. The album debuted at number 7 on the Billboard 200 with first week sales of 44,000 album-equivalent units, making it Fabolous's seventh top-10 album.


== Street Family Records ==
Street Family Records is a record label imprint, founded by Fabolous in 2006, in Brooklyn, New York.
Current artistsFabolous
Freck Billionaire
Paul Cain
Broadway
Red Cafe


== Personal life ==
Fabolous and his girlfriend Emily Bustamante have two sons & one daughter, born in 2008, 2015 & 2020.


=== Legal issues ===
In January and March 2003, Fabolous was arrested for possessing an unlicensed gun in his car. His bodyguard later showed proof of ownership for the gun.In the morning of October 17, 2006, Fabolous was shot once near his leg after exiting Justin's, a restaurant owned by Sean "Diddy" Combs in Manhattan. After the shooting, he and his entourage were charged with criminal possession of a weapon and criminal possession of a defaced firearm after being pulled over for running a red light, in which police discovered two unlicensed guns. Later on, Fabolous was treated at a local hospital and was released eight days later.On March 29, 2018, Fabolous was arrested for domestic violence after allegedly assaulting his girlfriend Emily Bustamante. On October 10, 2018, he was indicted by a grand jury in New Jersey on four felony charges of domestic assault. He reportedly accepted a plea deal in March 2019.


== Discography ==

Studio albumsGhetto Fabolous (2001)
Street Dreams (2003)
Real Talk (2004)
From Nothin' to Somethin' (2007)
Loso's Way (2009)
The Young OG Project (2014)
Summertime Shootout 3: Coldest Summer Ever (2019)Collaboration albumsFriday on Elm Street (with Jadakiss) (2017)


== Filmography ==


== Awards and nominations ==
American Music Awards
2007, Favorite Rap/Hip Hop Male Artist [Nominated]
ASCAP Rhythm and Soul Music Awards
2008, Top Rap Song, "Make Me Better" [Won]
BET Awards
2010, Best Male Hip Hop Artist [Nominated]
2010, Best Collaboration, "Say Aah" with Trey Songz [Nominated]
2010, Best Viewer's Choice, "Say Aah" with Trey Songz [Nominated]
BET Hip Hop Awards
2014, Best Mixtape, The Soul Tape 3 [Nominated]
2009, Viewer's Choice, "Throw It in the Bag" with The-Dream [Won]
2007, Best Hip Hop Collabo, "Make Me Better" with Ne-Yo [Nominated]
Grammy Awards
2010, Best Rap Performance by a Duo or a Group, "Money Goes, Honey Stays" with Jay-Z [Nominated]
2005, Best Rap/Sung Collaboration, "Dip It Low" with Christina Milian [Nominated]
The Source Awards
2003, Best Rap/R&B Collabo, "Can't Let You Go" with Lil Mo and Mike Shorey [Nominated]
2003, Trendsetter of the Year [Nominated]
Teen Choice Awards
2007, Best Choice: Rap Artist [Nominated]
2003, Choice Rap Track, "Can't Let You Go" with Lil Mo and Mike Shorey [Nominated]
2003, Choice R&B/Hip Hop Track, "4Ever" with Lil Mo [Nominated]


== References ==


== External links ==

Official websiteMark Anthony Williams Jr. (born July 13, 1982), better known by his stage name Mickey Factz, is an American hip hop recording artist from the Bronx borough of New York City, New York.


== Early life ==
Mickey Factz attended Adlai E. Stevenson High School, which is known for being the high school that hip hop pioneer Afrika Bambaataa attended. The school is notable for delivering students of musical prowess.Factz was exposed to music at an early age and his father would frequently rap to him. In return, he began reciting his very own rhymes, watching music videos, and studying the performances of his favorite music artists. After high school, Factz went to New York University School of Law where he dropped out to pursue music 


== Music career ==


=== In Search of N*E*R*D (2006) ===
Mickey Factz did many freestyles over N.E.R.D instrumentals on In Search of N*E*R*D (2006) in which he specifically rapped over N*E*R*D instrumentals. Here Mickey Factz collaborated with Steve-O who pushed him to really begin to listen to N*E*R*D and served as creative inspiration. Factz then worked to chop up the beats and make the project unique, gaining the attention of Pharrell himself.


=== Flashback Volume: 1: Back to the Future ===
Flashback Vol.1: Back to the Future (2007), which was created in order to pay homage to the type of music that Factz grew up with.  Mickey recorded about 40 tracks in total for this album and even after recording, he entered into another process that included the remix of over half the songs and instrumentals.


=== The Leak, Volume 1: The Understanding ===
For 2008's The Leak, Vol.1: The Understanding, Factz leaked one song every week on MySpace for 17 weeks. One of the songs, "I'm Sean (50 Shots More)", was written from the perspective of Sean Bell, who was killed by New York police in 2006.


=== Mixtape Success & Freshman XXL Cover (2008-2009) ===
In a 2008 interview, Factz recalled, "I had heard a few records from some New York artists, whose names I won’t mention, and I wasn’t very pleased with what they were doing. [...] I decided that I was going to get in the shoes of Sean Bell and talk about the night of him dying, him at his funeral, him seeing the press conferences and him just talking to the youth and letting them know that we have to come together and do better than what’s going on right now." 
Factz's song-per-week release strategy was also used for The Leak, Vol.2: The Inspiration, which contains guest appearances by Drake, Travie McCoy, and Tanya Morgan. 
The music video for "Rockin' N Rollin'", featuring The Cool Kids and produced by Precize, was added to rotation at MTV. Factz was named to XXL magazine's "Freshmen Class of '09" issue in 2008.


=== Battery Records & The Achievement (2010-present) ===
Factz contributed a song, "Rocker", to the soundtrack of the Fight Night Round 4 video game, 
and he signed to Battery Records in May 2010.
Mickey Factz recently finished touring with Big Sean and is working on his album The Achievement, which is set to be released in Winter 2013/2014
Mickey Factz became the new member of All City Chess Club when Lupe Fiasco said at a radio station "Mickey Factz is part of All City Chess Club."
While in the studio recording for his debut album, Mickey tweeted that he and Lupe Fiasco are collaborating on a track. Also pictures of the two together have surfaced on the internet recently. "I’m Better Than You (2010) was Mickey’s way of expressing his sense of confidence and recognition of the competitiveness of music. "Love.Lust.Lost" (2011) was an album based on one of Factz’ past relationship and was his attempt to get the girl he loved back. Although in the end, she slipped away, this album represents Mickey Factz’ growth not only as an artist but also as a person. Deeply personal and honest, this was enjoyed by a wide variety of people who could relate to his deep and heartfelt lyrics.


=== Mickey Mause ===
In 2012, Factz tried to release Mickey MauSe under his label, but they considered it to be too artistic and did not back it up. Factz went on to release this experimental project himself and in the album, Mickey Mause became his pseudo character, thrown into the 1980s as a graffiti writer who was later kicked out by his parents for being a troubled youth. This project represented what it truly meant to be an artist and much research was done in order to learn about Mickey Mouse and that era of time. Lyrically, this mixtape is known for being one of Factz’ best and gained him the opportunity to become closer to Lupe Fiasco.
In a 2015 interview with hip hop blog The Music Stash, Factz said a sequel to Mickey Mause called Mau2e was scheduled for Christmas.


== Other ventures ==


=== Television ===
Factz appeared in a Honda commercial later that year as a spokesman for the Accord.


=== Battle Rap ===
Factz has a long history as a competitor in the sport of battle rap dating back to the original battle leagues, and hosting battles at Ultimate Rap League events.
In 2017, Factz was involved in the battle rap league KOTD's Massacre event where he battled West Coast rapper Daylyt.


== Discography ==
Albums2016: The Achievement
2018: The New Museum
2018: I Said YoMixtapes2006: In Search Of N*E*R*D
2007: Flashback Vol.1: Back to the Future
2007: Heaven's Fallout
2008: The Leak Vol.1: The Understanding
2008: The Leak Vol.2: The Inspiration
2010: thedarkphoenix#ALPHA
2010: I'm Better Than You
2011: Heaven's Fallout: 4th Anniversary Re-Release
2011: Love.Lust.Lost
2012: Mickey MauSe
2012: #Y
2012: #Ynot
2014: 740 Park Ave
2014: Love.Lust.Lost.II
2015: Y3
2018: I Said Yo...
2018: The New Museum
2019: The Achievement .... (collaboration album with Nottz)
2020: Warped Collages


== Music videos ==


== References ==


== External links ==
GFCnewyork Blog GFCNY
Mickey Factz on Twitter 
Mickey Factz on FacebookJoseph Antonio Cartagena (born August 19, 1970), better known by his stage name Fat Joe, is an American rapper from New York City. He began his music career as a member of hip hop group Diggin' in the Crates Crew (D.I.T.C.) in 1992, he then embarked on a solo career a year later with his debut album Represent (1993). Cartegena formed the hip hop group Terror Squad and its namesake record label in the late 1990s, through which he would discover and sign fellow New York artists including Big Pun, Remy Ma, Tony Sunshine, and Cuban Link, as well as then-unknown producers DJ Khaled and Cool & Dre.
Represent spawned the single "Flow Joe", which reached number one on the Billboard Hot Rap Songs chart. It was followed up with the albums Jealous One's Envy (1995), Don Cartagena (1998), and Jealous Ones Still Envy (J.O.S.E.) (2001)—the latter received platinum certification from the RIAA and contained the hit single, "What's Luv?" (featuring Ja Rule and Ashanti). The song peaked at number two on the Billboard Hot 100, while his 2004 single "Lean Back" with his group Terror Squad reached number one on the chart, ultimately becoming his most successful record to date. In the following years, Cartagena would release the notable singles "Make It Rain" (featuring Lil Wayne) in 2006, and "All the Way Up" (with Remy Ma featuring French Montana and Infared) a decade later.
Cartagena has appeared in several films, including Scary Movie 3 and Happy Feet, as well as Spike Lee's Netflix series She's Gotta Have It. In 2018 he began hosting a podcast on Tidal, Coca Vision, where he discusses music, friendships, and pop culture with various celebrity guests.


== Early life ==
Fat Joe was born Joseph Antonio Cartagena in the Bronx borough of New York City, where he was raised by parents of Puerto Rican and Cuban descent. Living in the Forest Houses, a public housing project in the South Bronx neighborhood of Morrisania, Fat Joe began stealing at a young age to support his family. He also admits that he was a bully in his childhood. His brother introduced him to hip hop music.


== Music career ==


=== 1992–1995: early years ===
Under stage name Fat Joe da Gangsta and part of the rap group D.I.T.C., Cartagena was signed to Relativity Records in the early 1990s, recording material and working with many artists whom he would later sign to his own label. In 1993, his debut album Represent was released, featuring production from The Beatnuts, Diamond D, Lord Finesse, and others. Its lead single, "Flow Joe" peaked at number one on the Billboard Hot Rap Singles chart; other minor singles from the album included "Watch the Sound" and "This Shit Is Real".In 1995, Fat Joe released his second studio album, Jealous One's Envy, which peaked at #71 on The Billboard 200 and at #7 on Top R&B/Hip Hop Albums. The album featured a guest appearance from KRS-One and production from Diamond D. The lead single was "Success", which did not chart, but his second single, "Envy" peaked at #8 on the Hot Rap Tracks chart. One day while writing for the album at Chung King Studios, Fat Joe happened to find that his rap idol, LL Cool J was in another room with Trackmasters, working on the remix version of LL's single "I Shot Ya". After being welcomed to contribute a verse, Joe appeared on the record and in its accompanying video along with Foxy Brown, Keith Murray, and Prodigy of Mobb Deep. The track is considered by Joe to be one of his career highlights.During the recording of Jealous One's Envy, Joe discovered fellow Latino rapper Big Pun, who was featured on the song "Watch Out". Joe later explained the rapper's influence on him: "Latinos before us who had the opportunity to do it just didn't know how to do it. They came in trying to do this black music, waving flags. [But] we're trying to kick in the doors for other Latinos and represent our people, and it shows."


=== 1998–2005: signing with Atlantic, Terror Squad, J.O.S.E., 50 Cent feud ===
In 1997, Fat Joe signed with Mystic Entertainment Group and The Warner Music Group's Atlantic Records through Craig Kallman's Big Beat Records. Under the deal, he was granted his own label, Terror Squad Productions. He subsequently began recording his third studio album. His third studio album, Don Cartagena was released on September 1, 1998. It was released in conjunction with his own label Terror Squad Productions. It peaked on the Billboard 200 at #7 and #2 on Top R&B/Hip Hop albums, eventually being certified gold by the RIAA.The album featured three singles with accompanying music videos, "Bet Ya Man Can't Triz", "John Blaze", and "Don Cartagena". Guest appearances included Nas, Puff Daddy, Big Pun, Raekwon, Jadakiss, and Bone Thugs-N-Harmony. On the album, Fat Joe debuted his own group Terror Squad consisting of the late Big Pun, as well as Cuban Link, Triple Seis, Prospect, Armageddon, and later Remy Ma. Former Terror Squad member Triple Seis also went on record when asked who had written Fat Joe's lyrics, stating that he and Pun were Joe's ghostwriters for Don Cartagena, and asserts that Joe continues to hire ghostwriters.
Fat Joe executive produced and waa featured on Big Pun's 1998 album Capital Punishment. In 1999, he appeared on Jennifer Lopez's single "Feelin' So Good" from her On the 6 album with late rapper Big Pun.
Fat Joe released his fourth album Jealous Ones Still Envy (J.O.S.E.) in 2001, with Fat Joe eexecutive producing the album. The album featured a star-studded lineup from the likes of Ashanti, Ja Rule, N.O.R.E., Busta Rhymes, Petey Pablo, M.O.P., Ludacris, R. Kelly, Buju Banton, and artists from his Terror Squad label. The lead single "We Thuggin'" featuring R. Kelly was a big hit in late 2001, but would not reach the level of his hit single "What's Luv?". At the time of the album's release, Fat Joe was managed by The Squad Music. The album was Fat Joe's biggest album commercially, being certified Platinum in America for shipping and selling over a million copies. However, Fat Joe's fifth album Loyalty, released later in 2002, was not as successful.
In 2003, Fat Joe was featured in the pop single "I Want You" by Mexican singer Thalía. The same year, he and Tony Sunshine performed the single "Crush Tonight" from Loyalty on the Comedy Central program Chappelle's Show.
Despite the setback, Fat Joe scored a number-one hit in 2004 with his group Terror Squad, collaborating with Remy Ma on the Scott Storch production "Lean Back" from the album True Story. Jason Birchmeier of AllMusic called the song "a perfect club-ready duet between Joe and Remy Ma that boasts a trademark Scott Storch beat and a memorable singalong hook and dance-along step". He then began recording material for Ivy Queen's debut English-language album Real in support of her goal to compete in the world of English-language hip hop music. Fat Joe portrayed himself and provided his own voice and likeness for the September 2004 video game, Def Jam: Fight For NY. The video game also featured Fat Joe's 2002 song Take A Look At My Life from Loyalty.
A year later, in 2005, Fat Joe released his sixth album All or Nothing, noted for featuring the popular diss track "My Fofo", aimed at fellow New York rapper 50 Cent, who had dissed Joe for recording with Ja Rule. All or Nothing spawned the singles "So Much More" and "Get It Poppin" featuring Nelly, also with guest appearances from Eminem, Mase, Remy Ma, Mashonda, and R. Kelly. Responding to "My Fofo", 50 Cent attacked Fat Joe in his song "Piggy Bank" from his best-selling 2005 album The Massacre. Fat Joe subsequently attacked 50's street credibility and called him a "coward" on a phone interview with Kay Slay of New York City hip-hop radio station WQHT. The conflict carried on at the 2005 MTV Video Music Awards, while Fat Joe introduced the reggaeton act featuring Daddy Yankee, Joe remarked, "I feel safe with all the police protection—courtesy of G-Unit." Shortly after, when MTV switched to a commercial break, 50 Cent directed an obscenity at Joe, and 50 Cent jumped on stage as Fat Joe was leaving.His recordings catalog for Atlantic Records is no longer under ownership of Warner Music Group, being divested in 2017 to RT Industries, a company founded by Razor & Tie founders. However, Warner Music retains the digital distribution rights, now under its ADA division. This divestment was required as effect of a deal with IMPALA and the Merlin Network, related to Warner Music's acquisition of Parlophone Records from EMI.


=== 2006–2008: Me, Myself & I, The Elephant in the Room, the 50 Cent feud continued, and more ===
Me, Myself & I, released in 2006, is Fat Joe's seventh album. It was his first album released on his new deal with Virgin Records. It featured the hit single "Make It Rain" with southern rapper Lil Wayne, followed by "No Drama (Clap and Revolve)". Fat Joe did a freestyle cipher segment for VH1's "Freestyle 59" competition in October 2006 prior to the VH1 Hip Hop Honors featuring New Jersey emcee Neuse.In June 2007, Catholic priest Michael Pfleger targeted Fat Joe as among several rappers he believed promoted misogyny in his billboard campaign "Stop Listening to Trash", which was launched June 18, 2007, throughout Chicago, where Pfleger preaches. Also that month, Fat Joe was featured in the DJ Khaled singles "We Takin' Over" alongside Akon, T.I., Rick Ross, Birdman, and Lil Wayne and the remix to Khaled's "I'm So Hood" with Lil Wayne, Young Jeezy, Rick Ross, Busta Rhymes, Big Boi, Ludacris, and Birdman. Verbal disputes between Fat Joe and 50 Cent continued during this time period: in September 2007, on the BET program Rap City, 50 Cent accused Fat Joe of being cowardly for not willing to confront him, but Fat Joe dismissed this claim as nonsense. Later in January, 50 Cent released another Fat Joe diss, called "Southside Nigga (I'm Leaving)". At the end of January 2008, Fat Joe and his longtime accountant Brian Dittrich both denied rumors spreading on the Internet that Fat Joe owed the IRS taxes.Fat Joe's eighth solo studio album The Elephant in the Room was distributed by Imperial Records, a division of Capitol Records and Terror Squad Entertainment, and released on March 11, 2008; its lead single was "I Won't Tell" featuring singer J. Holiday. The album debuted at the sixth position on the Billboard Hot 100. "Ain't Sayin' Nuthin'" followed and featured Plies.
On March 20, 2008, shortly after record sales were released for Fat Joe's new album The Elephant in the Room, 50 Cent released a video via his YouTube account, which features the "funeral" of Fat Joe, which shows 50 Cent crying in the fake footage. 50 Cent then talks about Fat Joe's record sales and states that he ended Fat Joe's career (like he says he did to Ja Rule's) and that his mixtape blew out Fat Joe's album.


=== 2009: Jealous Ones Still Envy 2 ===
Fat Joe's ninth solo studio album, J.O.S.E. 2, was released towards the end of June 2009. The project reprises the title of Joe's 2002 RIAA-Certified Platinum release, Jealous Ones Still Envy (J.O.S.E.), and marked Joe's third release since bringing his Terror Squad imprint to the EMI family in 2006. For this album, Joe has reached out to many artists, landing assists from Ron Browz, Fabolous, Lil' Kim, T-Pain, Lil Wayne, and Akon. Producers include Jim Jonsin, The Inkredibles, and frequent collaborator StreetRunner. "One", featuring Akon, was the first single. The album was released on October 6, 2009, and sold 11,000 copies in its first week. It debuted on The Billboard 200 at #73.


=== 2010: signing to E1 Music and The Darkside ===
In January 2010, Fat Joe announced that he was working on a new album, The Darkside Vol. 1. MTV News reported that Fat Joe intended "all the material...to be much harsher" than his previous album. Production comes from The Alchemist, Cool & Dre, Streetrunner, DJ Premier, Scoop DeVille, Just Blaze, Scram Jones, Raw Uncut and DJ Infamous with guest appearances by Busta Rhymes, Trey Songz, Lil Wayne, R. Kelly, Clipse, Cam'ron, Rico Love, Too $hort, TA, and Young Jeezy. The first single from The Darkside Vol. 1 is "(Ha Ha) Slow Down", which features Young Jeezy. The second single off the album is "If It Ain't About Money" and features Trey Songz.
On March 28, 2010, Fat Joe signed a record deal with E1 Music.The Darkside Vol. 1 was released on July 27, 2010, and sold approximately 12,000 copies in the first week and entered the Billboard 200 at #27.


=== 2011–present: Feature on Champagne And Cocaine, Darkside Vol. 2., Plata O Plomo with Remy Ma, and Family Ties with Dre ===
On April 7, 2011, Jamie Drastik released his second mixtape Champagne And Cocaine which contains the song "One Hundred And Ten" featuring Fat Joe.Joe was featured on a remix to DJ Khaled's song "Welcome to My Hood", which also features Ludacris, T-Pain, Busta Rhymes, Twista, Mavado, Birdman, Ace Hood, Game, Jadakiss, Bun B, and Waka Flocka Flame. It is included as the final track on Khaled's fifth studio album We the Best Forever.
In an interview with XXL Magazine on September 21, 2011, Fat Joe stated The Darkside Vol. 2 is going to be his first ever official mixtape and will feature the Mark Henry-produced songs "Massacre on Madison" and "Drop a Body", both of which were released earlier in the year. Joe went on to say he is also working on an album which is yet to be named but the first single is called "Another Round" produced by Cool and Dre and Young Lad and features Chris Brown.On October 19, 2011, "Another Round" the first single off Joe's yet to be named eleventh studio album was released on iTunes. The second single released from the album is "Yellow Tape" which features Lil Wayne, ASAP Rocky, and French Montana. In September 2012, Joe featured in Grammy awards winner Alejandro Sanz's new album, La Música No Se Toca in a music named Down. Joe would then release another single, "Ballin'" on March 18, 2013. The song features Wiz Khalifa and Teyana Taylor.Fat Joe joined D.I.T.C. for their album Sessions. The album was released in October 2016 and was preceded by the lead single "Rock Shyt". Via Hiphop Wired, Joe revealed that he and Remy Ma are releasing a joint album. The first single, "All the Way Up" featuring French Montana and Infared, peaked at #27 on the Hot 100, becoming his first top 40 hit in nearly a decade. The album, Plata O Plomo, and was released in February 2017.
On August 2, 2017, Fat Joe released "So Excited" with Dre.
On July 24, 2018, he released "Attention" with Chris Brown.
Fat Joe's second collaborative album called Family Ties, with Dre, was released in December 2019.In December 2020, Fat Joe appeared in the ComplexLand virtual event and talked about the best sneakers of the year.


== Personal life ==


=== Family ===
Fat Joe is married with three children, and has lived in Miami and Tenafly, New Jersey.


=== Community work ===
Fat Joe has been back to his old school in the Bronx, New York to donate computers for students.
In 2008, he attended the grand opening of the Hip Hop Soda Shop in Miami which was a community outreach project set up by Ben Chavis for the youth to hang out and do things such as record music, use the computers and play on Xbox 360s.At a "School is Cool" assembly in Public School 5 in Jersey City, New Jersey on June 11, 2009, Fat Joe was a speaker.On January 23, 2011, Fat Joe appeared with Newark mayor Cory Booker and fitness expert Jeff Halevy at an event to promote the Newark branch of Michelle Obama's Let's Move! initiative against childhood obesity.


=== Weight loss ===
By 1996, he weighed 300 pounds (140 kg). In 2005, Stuff magazine and ContactMusic.com profiled Fat Joe's weight loss efforts.
In 2011, Fat Joe unveiled his latest weight loss efforts in the video for his song "Drop a Body" after losing 88 pounds (40 kg) off his previous weight of 350 pounds (160 kg). Furthermore, he follows a low-carb approach, eating sweet potatoes but not eating certain carbohydrates such as white bread, white rice, and white pasta.In 2022, Fat Joe said that he would not change his stage name from Fat Joe despite his weight loss, because it would not be a good marketing move.


=== Legal issues ===
On September 8, 1998, Fat Joe and Big Pun were arrested on assault charges for hitting a man with a baseball bat and stealing the man's gold chain on June 14 that year. Joe was arrested again on May 12, 2002, for allegedly fighting with another man at B.B. King's Blues Club in Times Square, but the charges were dropped on January 10, 2003.In two murder cases, Fat Joe has been named a witness:
Joe's former bodyguard, Jose Mulero (also known as Sing Sing), was arrested on September 17, 2004, for the April 15, 1994, shooting death of 16-year-old Ernesto Rivera at a Bronx nightclub. Responding to a subpoena, Fat Joe claimed to have heard the shooting and seen people fleeing the scene, but investigators argued that he was standing closer to Mulero, by a door.Miami Beach police also named Fat Joe as a witness in a 2007 Memorial Day double murder outside David's Cafe II in South Beach. Jermaine Wufgang Chamberline of Miami Gardens was accused of shooting Lessli Paz and Joey Navarro to death on that morning; Fat Joe and the two victims were sitting in a rented Cadillac Escalade parked outside the restaurant when a fight broke out between passengers and another man.In December 2012, Fat Joe pleaded guilty to tax evasion for not paying income tax on over $3 million from 2007 to 2010. On June 24, 2013, he was sentenced to four months in prison for tax evasion. He began the sentence on August 26, 2013, and was released on November 28, 2013.


=== LGBT beliefs and support ===
During an interview with Vlad TV, Joe stated that he believes that gay people should not hide their sexuality and should stand by who they are. He mentioned that it's possible that he has done songs with gay rappers and that there are likely several gay people besides rappers in the hip hop industry who are in the closet, describing it as a "Gay Mafia".His comments came after he was asked to comment on radio personality Mister Cee being arrested for public lewdness with a transgender sex worker.


== Discography ==

Studio albumsRepresent (1993)
Jealous One's Envy (1995)
Don Cartagena (1998)
Jealous Ones Still Envy (J.O.S.E.) (2001)
Loyalty (2002)
All or Nothing (2005)
Me, Myself & I (2006)
The Elephant in the Room (2008)
Jealous Ones Still Envy 2 (J.O.S.E. 2) (2009)
The Darkside Vol. 1 (2010)Collaboration albumsThe Album with Terror Squad (1999)
True Story with Terror Squad (2004)
Plata O Plomo with Remy Ma (2017)
Family Ties with Dre (2019)
What Would Big Do 2021 with DJ Drama (2021)


== Filmography ==


=== Film ===


=== Television ===


=== Video game ===


== Awards and nominations ==


=== ASCAP Rhythm & Soul Music Awards ===


=== Billboard Latin Music Awards ===


=== Grammy Awards ===


=== iHeartRadio Music Awards ===


=== BET Awards ===


=== MTV Video Music Awards ===


== See also ==
List of Puerto Ricans
Latin hip hop
List of number-one dance hits (United States)
List of artists who reached number one on the US Dance chart
List of Cubans


== References ==


== External links ==

Fat Joe on Twitter
Fat Joe on Instagram
Official website (archived from 2013)
Fat Joe at AllMusic 
Fat Joe at IMDbBruce Edward Washington Jr. (April 3, 1973 – July 10, 2015), better known by his stage name Hussein Fatal or sometimes as Fatal Hussein, was an American rapper, best known for his collaborative work with Tupac Shakur as a member of the rap group Outlaw Immortalz or just Outlawz.


== Early life ==
Fatal was born Bruce Edward Washington Jr. in New Jersey on April 3, 1973.


== Career ==
Washington first appeared as "Hussein Fatal" in February 1996 on the songs "All Bout U" and "When We Ride" from Shakur's album All Eyez on Me. As a member of the Outlaw Immortalz, his name was chosen to evoke a villain, Iraqi president Saddam Hussein. In June 1996, he was featured on Shakur's song "Hit 'Em Up", insulting Shakur's rivals in the song's second verse.After Shakur was fatally shot in September 1996 and Outlawz member Yaki Kadafi was murdered in November, Washington did not appear on another recording until 1998 when Relativity Records released his first solo album In the Line of Fire. The label went bankrupt; the album wasn't promoted and sold poorly.Washington then signed with Rap-A-Lot Records and began work on a second solo studio album, Death Before Dishonor, recording over 40 songs before being arrested in December 1999 for an assault committed three years earlier. Rap-A-Lot Records released the album as Fatal after he was paroled in 2002.In 2003, Washington performed on four songs of Ja Rule's album Blood in My Eye: "The Life", "It's Murda (Freestyle)", "The Wrap (Freestyle)" and the eponymous title track, "Blood in My Eye". He also appeared on the remix of Ashanti's "Rain On Me", and in Ja Rule's "Clap Back" music video.He performed again with Outlawz on their 2010 mixtape Killuminati 2K10 and their 2011 mixtape Killuminati 2K11, and on the 2011 album, Perfect Timing. He also appeared on the tracks "Emancipation" and "Welcome To Real Life", from fellow Outlawz member Young Noble's 2012 album Son of God. He continued to release mixtapes on his own label, Thugtertainment, until his death.


== Death ==
Fatal died in a car accident in Banks County, Georgia on July 10, 2015, at the age of 42. His girlfriend Zanetta Yearby was driving and was charged with DUI, first-degree vehicular homicide, and reckless driving.


== Discography ==


== Filmography ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Hussein Fatal on Facebook
Hussein Fatal at IMDbChristian Robert Felner (known professionally as Felly) is an American rapper, singer, songwriter, and record producer from Connecticut who is currently signed to Same Plate Entertainment (a joint venture with Sony Music). He has released numerous EPs, mixtapes, and albums. His most recent album Bad Radio was released on December 9th, 2022.


== Early life and education ==
Christian Felner was born and grew up in Trumbull, Connecticut. He graduated high school from Fairfield College Preparatory School in Fairfield, Connecticut in 2013. He began releasing music while still in high school, and also built a following on YouTube by making and selling beats.After graduating, he went on to attend the University of Southern California (USC) where he studied music. While in college, Felly founded 2273 Records with fellow USC attendees Jake Standley and Gyyps (with whom Felly frequently collaborates). He graduated from USC in 2017.


== Career ==
While still attending USC, Felly released several mixtapes and an EP. His first project to receive major attention came in May 2014 with the release of Waking Up To Sirens, which featured the single "Fabrics". This led to an appearance as an opener for Madlib. He followed that with a second mixtape, Milk & Sugar, which was released in November 2014. That collection featured a guest appearance from Ari Lennox on the track, "Tell Me". His third mixtape, This Shit Comes in Waves, was released in July 2015, and featured the single "7th King". That song was the namesake for his 2016 tour (the "7th King Tour") which ran for 21 dates in the U.S.In July 2016, Felly released an EP entitled, Young Fel, and embarked on another tour in support of it. That collection featured the single "Desert Eagle" (featuring Gyyps), for which Felly filmed a music video. In 2017, he would embark on the "Mermaid Gang" tour, which was named after the group formed by Felly, Gyyps, and Trip Carter. All three members performed on stage during the 40-date tour. Throughout 2017, Felly released numerous songs including "Ali", "Baby Boy", "Fight the Feeling", "Delta Deathbus to Zion" (featuring Peter $un), "Hotel Room", "Keep The Team Straight", and numerous others. Some of the tracks were part of a summer series called New Flavors which saw Felly release a new song each Wednesday over that summer.In August 2017, he released his first studio album, Wild Strawberries, as a Cinematic Music Group signee. The album featured the singles "Baby Boy", "Bag Season" (featuring Trip Carter), and "Wide Angle" (featuring Konshens). It also featured other guest appearances from Gyyps and Frex. In the fall of 2017, Felly opened for T-Pain for two nights on his "Acoustic Tour". Felly then embarked on his own 20-date "Strawberry Season Tour". In March 2018, he released an EP called, Winters in Brooklyn featuring the single, "BLANCO".In September of that year, it was announced that Felly had been signed to Same Plate Entertainment, a joint venture with Sony Music. He released his first project on that label (Surf Trap) later that month. The lead single off the album was "Pretty Girl" followed by "Miami". In 2019, Felly continued releasing new music with tracks like "At Fault" (with Medasin) and "Cheap Cheap" (with Jack Harlow). He was also featured on the MAX song, "Acid Dreams", which was released in July 2019. In October of that year, Felly released the single, "Heartstrings", which featured Carlos Santana on guitar.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===


=== Mixtapes ===


=== EPs ===


=== Singles ===


=== as Producer ===


== References ==Darold Durard Brown Ferguson Jr. (born October 20, 1988), known professionally as ASAP Ferg (stylized as A$AP Ferg), is an American rapper from New York City's Harlem neighborhood. Aside from his solo career, he is a member of the hip hop collective A$AP Mob, from which he adopted a record deal with Polo Grounds and RCA, the same labels that helped launch A$AP Worldwide. Two years prior, Ferg's A$AP Mob cohorts A$AP Rocky and A$AP Yams, negotiated their own respective deal in 2011. His debut studio album Trap Lord was released on August 20, 2013, and was met with generally positive reviews. On April 22, 2016, Ferguson released his second studio album, Always Strive and Prosper. On August 18, 2017, Ferguson released his second mixtape, Still Striving, which was preceded by the single, "Plain Jane" (featuring Nicki Minaj). In 2019 and 2020, he released Floor Seats and Floor Seats II respectively, the latter featuring the single "Move Ya Hips" (featuring Nicki Minaj and MadeinTYO). In 2021, Ferguson signed an additional management deal with Roc Nation.Outside of music, Ferguson is the founder of the street fashion brand Traplord, namesake of his debut album.


== Early life ==
Darold Durard Brown was born on October 20, 1988, in the Harlem neighborhood of New York City to Trinidadian parents. Ferg was raised in Hamilton Heights. His father, Darold Ferguson, owned a small Harlem boutique and printed shirts and logos for record labels; including Bad Boy Records and performers Teddy Riley, Heavy D and Bell Biv DeVoe. Before starting his music career, Ferg initially aspired to start his own clothing line. Inspired by his father, who died of kidney failure, Ferg launched clothing and jewelry lines at a young age and attended art school. In 2005, Ferg began launching the "Devoni Clothing", that he designed and distributed high-end belts, which have been worn by Chris Brown, Swizz Beatz and Diggy Simmons.


== Musical career ==


=== 2009–2012: Career beginnings with A$AP Mob ===
By 2009, he started developing an aggressive, trap style of hip-hop. "Trapping means hustling," he explained. "I went from painting to making clothes to rapping. I always put myself into everything I do one hundred percent. It doesn't matter what I'm working on. I want to perfect everything I do. Success is the only option. They call me 'Trap Lord' because my hustle game is impeccable." Friends since high school, A$AP Rocky recognized that Ferg had an "impeccable hustle game" and pushed Ferg to continue rapping as much as possible. They later joined the hip hop collective A$AP Mob, from which they both adopted their respective monikers. Since 2010, they collaborated on various songs such as "Get High," "Kissin' Pink" and "Ghetto Symphony", the latter being from Rocky's chart-topping major label debut, Long. Live. A$AP (2013).


=== 2012–2014: Trap Lord ===
Ferg's debut single "Work", produced by Chinza and Fly, appeared on the A$AP Mob mixtape Lords Never Worry, released on August 28, 2012. The song's music video quickly earned over 2 million online views and was dubbed one of the "50 Best Songs of 2012" by Complex Magazine. On January 10, 2013, he announced Trap Lord would be the title of his debut album. When speaking on his debut album Trap Lord, Ferg said: "I hope people take the good and the bad from what I've got to say, I've seen so much shit in my life. There were times I ducked bullets at a basketball game, and then I went to a fashion show. I've experienced depression. I've experienced triumph. I've experienced hate. I've experienced love. I learned how to be independent. I made it out of the hood, and now I want go to the top."On January 10, 2013, it was announced that he signed a record deal with RCA Records and Polo Grounds. On May 14, 2013, the remix to "Work", featuring fellow American rappers A$AP Rocky, Schoolboy Q, French Montana and Trinidad James, was released to digital retailers. On June 2, 2013, while revealing Trap Lord would feature guest appearances from hip hop groups Bone Thugs-n-Harmony and Onyx, Ferg announced that the album would be released on August 20, 2013. The album debuted at number 9 on the Billboard 200 chart, with total album sales of 46,000 copies in the United States. On October 15, he was named "Rookie of the Year" at the 2013 BET Hip Hop Awards. However, he was not there to accept the award as he did not think he was going to win. In 2014, Ferg appeared as a featured artist on the track "Hands on Me" by Ariana Grande, from her second album My Everything. The album was released on August 22, 2014.


=== 2015–present: Always Strive and Prosper and Floor Seats II ===
On February 25, 2015, Ferg released the video for the single "Dope Walk", a track from his Ferg Forever (2014) mixtape in which he coined a viral dance of the same name. Composed entirely of iPhone footage shot during New York Fashion Week, the video starred fashion model Cara Delevingne and featured cameos from a host of other celebrities, including Kris Jenner, Kanye West, Diddy, Alexander Wang, Russell Simmons, Justin Bieber, Beyoncé, Rihanna, A$AP Rocky, Jeremy Scott, Les Twins, and Haim. Ferg told Rolling Stone, "With 'Dope Walk' I wanted to bring back kids dancing and having fun again. That's how it used to be in Harlem. I remember everybody Harlem-shaking and 'Chicken Noodle Soup'-ing. Those were some of the most fun and memorable times in my life."In late 2015, Ferg directed the music video for rapper Future's "Thought It Was a Drought". In an interview with The Source, Ferg stated that his "...new album is my best work yet. I put my all into it. I always tell people I really don't know what I'm going to do after this album, because I'm bearing so much truth with this album." On April 22, 2016, Ferg released his second studio album, which is titled Always Strive And Prosper. The album's first single, "New Level" featuring Future was certified gold by the RIAA on August 11, 2016. In 2016, he and Playboi Carti embarked on the "Turnt & Burnt" tour which had 23 stops. On June 9, 2017, Lost Kings released "Look At Us Now" as a single featuring Ferg and singer Ally Brooke.Since 2015, Ferg is accompanied on tour by his dj TJ Mizell, who is the son of the legendary Jam Master Jay.In 2018, Ferg appeared in a video ad for Tiffany's with Elle Fanning remixing "Moon River" and later that year, he also narrated the Adidas World Cup advert 'Creativity is the Answer'.In 2020, Ferg, along with musician Matt Sweeney, he appeared on the Run The Jewels track "A Few Words for the Firing Squad (Radiation)" on the latter's fourth studio album, RTJ4. He appeared at the end of "A Few Words..." on the hidden track, "Theme Song", providing his voice with the refrain "Yankee and the Brave".On September 1, 2020, it was alleged that Ferg was no longer in and affiliated with A$AP Mob by members of the group. This was later redacted by A$AP Nast on Twitter, with his statements retweeted by the official A$AP Mob Twitter account.
On September 18, ASAP Ferg's official YouTube account was changed to only say Ferg, implying that he has departed A$AP Mob, but this has been unconfirmed.A$AP Ferg released his fifth album, Floor Seats II, on September 25, 2020. It includes collaborations with Marilyn Manson, Dennis Rodman, and Mulatto, among others.


== Discography ==

Trap Lord (2013)
Always Strive and Prosper (2016)
Still Striving (2017)
Floor Seats (2019)
Floor Seats II (2020)


== Filmography ==


== Awards and nominations ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official Website
ASAP Ferg at IMDbJoseph Robert Saddler (born January 1, 1958), popularly known by his stage name Grandmaster Flash, is a Barbadian DJ and producer. He created a DJ technique called the Quick Mix Theory. This technique serviced the break-dancer and the rapper by elongating the drum breaks through the use of duplicate copies of vinyl. This technique gave birth to cutting and scratching. It also gave rappers better music with a seamless elongated bed of beats to speak on. He also invented the slipmat.He is the founder and creator of Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five, the first rap group to be inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2007. In 2019 he became the first hip hop artist to be honored with the Polar Music Prize. On May 21, 2022, he acquired an honorary doctorate in Fine Arts from Buffalo State University. On June 1, 2023, he was awarded an honorary doctorate in music from Lehman College in the Bronx, NY. On August 4 Grandmaster was issued a proclamation from the city of New York stating that August 4th is Grandmaster Flash day.


== Early life, family and education ==
Saddler's family immigrated to the United States from Barbados. He was raised in the Bronx, New York City, where he attended Samuel Gompers High School, a public vocational school. There, he learned how to repair electronic equipment. Saddler's parents played an important role in his interest in music. His father was a fan of Caribbean and African American recordings.During his childhood, Joseph Saddler was fascinated by his father's record collection. In an interview, he reflected: "My father was a very heavy record collector.... I used to open his closets and just watch all the records he had. I used to get into trouble for touching his records, but I'd go right back and bother them." Saddler's early interest in DJing came from this fascination with his father's record collection as well as his mother's desire for him to educate himself in electronics. After high school, he became involved in the earliest New York DJ scene, attending parties set up by early luminaries like DJ Kool Herc and Disco King Mario.
Saddler's uncle Sandy Saddler was a featherweight boxing champion.


== Innovations ==
Grandmaster Flash observed the styles of the smooth transitions of a disco DJ versus the non-fluid non-BPM-matched transitions of early DJing. He chose to complete his studies with the former. Grandmaster Flash came up with a fingertip-to-vinyl and crossfader technique called the Quick Mix Theory. In doing this, he figured out a mathematical way to cut, paste, repeat, and extend a very minuscule piece of an existing composition. This innovation took place in two places in the Bronx. The first location was his parents' house, 2730 Dewey Ave in the Throggs Neck Projects of the Bronx. The completion of the Quik Mix Theory was done at 927 Fox Street in the Hunts Point Area of the Bronx.
The Quick Mix Theory gave birth to techniques such as cutting, scratching, and transforming. 

Backspin technique (or quick-mix theory): New York hip-hop DJs understood that Grandmaster Flash's short drum break technique became the way for all hip-hop DJs to play. A quick mix DJ builds a foundation on timing. This particular DJ art form gave birth to human beings having a clean, excellently timed, extended bed of music to speak on. This led to sampling. Sampling led to big business. Today under hip hop's four elements umbrella, this record sampling technique gave birth to what is known as rap, where the emcee or rapper verbally tells their story on a seamless bed of music.In addition to Grandmaster Flash's on-time BPM-perfected technique, additional items were needed to pull this off. These items were felt and wax paper. The combination of these two materials cut into the size of a record and placed on the turntable (at that time referred to as a "wafer") allowed the record to move fluidly. The end result of that was the creation of what we today call the Slipmat. Another item that played a key role in the successful implementation of the quick mix theory is the needle/stylus. 
He realized that the stylus came in two classes: elliptical, which sounded better but would not stay in the groove, and spherical. The spherical needle, although making the song sound worse, would stay inside the groove. This, in turn, allowed Flash to turn the vinyl counterclockwise to re-arrive at the top of the break.
Punch phrasing (or clock theory): This technique involved isolating very short segments of music, typically horn hits, and rhythmically punching them over the sustained beat using the mixer.
Scratching: Although the invention of record scratching as a form of adding to the musical entertainment is generally credited to Grand Wizzard Theodore, Grandmaster Flash perfected the technique and brought it to new audiences. Scratching, along with punch phrasing, exhibited a unique aspect of party DJing: instead of passively spinning records, he manipulated them to create new music.


== Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five ==


=== 1970s ===
Grandmaster Flash played parties and collaborated with rappers such as Kurtis Blow and Lovebug Starski. In the late 1970s, he formed his own group. The original lineup consisted of Cowboy (Keef Cowboy), Melle Mel (Melvin Glover), and Kidd Creole (Nathaniel Glover), and the ensemble went by the name "Grandmaster Flash & the 3 MCs". Cowboy created the term hip hop. He created the term while teasing a friend who had just joined the U.S. Army, by scat singing the words "hip/hop/hip/hop" in a way that mimicked the rhythmic cadence of soldiers marching. Cowboy later worked the "hip hop" cadence into a part of his stage performance.Mel was the first rapper to call himself "MC" (Master of Ceremony). Two other rappers briefly joined, but they were replaced more permanently by Rahiem (Guy Todd Williams, previously in the Funky Four) and Scorpio (Eddie Morris, a.k.a. Mr. Ness) to make Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five. Quickly gaining recognition for their skillful raps, Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five pioneered MCing and freestyle battles. Some of the staple phrases in MCing have their origins in the early shows and recordings of the group. In 1978, the new group began performing regularly at Disco Fever in the Bronx, one of the first times a hip-hop group was given a weekly gig at a well-known venue.Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five were signed to Bobby Robinson's Enjoy Records and in 1979 released their first single, "Superrappin'".


=== 1980s ===
In 1980 they signed to Sugar Hill Records and began touring and releasing numerous singles. The seminal "The Adventures of Grandmaster Flash on the Wheels of Steel", released in 1981, is a 7-minute solo showcase of Grandmaster Flash's virtuosic turntable skills, combining elements of Blondie's "Rapture", Michael Viner's Incredible Bongo Band's "Apache", Queen's "Another One Bites the Dust", Chic's "Good Times", and the group's own "Freedom". It is also the first documented appearance of scratching on a record. That year, the group opened for The Clash and were poorly received by an audience unaccustomed to the new style.
The group's most significant hit was the electro rap song "The Message" (1982), which was produced by in-house Sugar Hill producer Clifton "Jiggs" Chase and featured session musician Duke Bootee. Unlike earlier rap tunes, "The Message" featured a grim narrative about inner city violence, drugs, and poverty. In 2002, it was one of 50 recordings chosen by the Library of Congress to be added to the National Recording Registry, the first hip hop recording to receive this honor. Critics praised the song's social awareness, calling the chorus "a slow chant seething with desperation and fury."Other than Melle Mel, no members of the group actually appear in the song. Rahiem lip-synced Duke Bootee's vocal in the music video. The same year, Grandmaster Flash appeared in the movie "Wild Style" and sued Sugar Hill over the non-payment of royalties. Tensions mounted as "The Message" gained in popularity, eventually leading to a rupture between Melle Mel and Grandmaster Flash. Soon the group disintegrated entirely. Grandmaster Flash, Kidd Creole, and Rahiem left Sugar Hill, signed with Elektra Records, and continued on as simply "Grandmaster Flash", while Melle Mel and the others continued on as "Grandmaster Melle Mel & the Furious Five".
Grandmaster Flash was also interviewed in the 1986 cult documentary Big Fun in the Big Town.Although frequently credited on the records, Grandmaster Flash does not actually appear on "The Message", "Freedom", or many of the other Furious Five songs. Although Grandmaster Flash provided the central element of the group's sound when performing live (in addition to giving the group its name), there was little room for his turntablism in early singles driven by the grooves of live session musicians. Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five reformed in 1987 for a charity concert, and in 1988 they released a new album. The group reunited again in 1994, although Cowboy died in 1989.


=== 1990s ===
In 1999, Grandmaster Flash recorded with DJ Tomekk and Flavor Flav the single 1, 2, 3, ... Rhymes Galore. The single stayed for 17 weeks in the TOP ten of the German charts.


=== 2000s ===
In 2008 he released a memoir, The Adventures of Grandmaster Flash: My Life, My Beats, in which he talks about the origins of his fascination with scratching records and creating new beats. From a young age, Flash talks about how he would sneak into his father's record room to watch the record player spin, and then get punished for touching the records. He found inspiration even from things not associated with music. The spokes of his bicycle caused an interest in how record players create music just by rotating a grooved disc. Flash continued to experiment by taking apart any machine he could get his hands on to figure out how it worked. His early work shows the innovative ways in which his artistic abilities led to what is considered the first evolution of hip hop culture.He hosted a weekly show on Sirius Satellite Radio (Friday Night Fire with Grandmaster Flash) and was presented with the BET "I Am Hip Hop Icon" award in 2006.Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five were the first hip-hop/rap group inducted into the Rock & Roll Hall of Fame on March 12, 2007, by Jay-Z. In 2008, he remixed the single "Into the Galaxy" by the Australian group, Midnight Juggernauts.It has been said that "his pioneering mixing skills transformed the turntable into a true 'instrument', and his ability to get a crowd moving has made his DJ sets legendary."Grandmaster Flash appears in the video game DJ Hero as a playable character along with original mixes created for the game.
In December 2011, Grandmaster Flash was reported to be at work on his 12th album.Aired in 2016, the Netflix original series The Get Down features a version of Grandmaster Flash that is played by Mamoudou Athie. The series takes place in 1977 New York City and follows the genesis of the DJing, B-boying, graffiti, and emceeing, the four element cultures of hip-hop. After the premiere of The Get Down, Netflix premiered Hip-Hop Evolution, a music documentary discussing the history of hip hop in which Grandmaster Flash talks about the evolution of his art.
In 2023, Grandmaster Flash competed in season nine of The Masked Singer as "Polar Bear". He was eliminated on "New York Night". As part of his encore, some DJ equipment was brought out so that Grandmaster Flash can scratch along to Chic's "Good Times".


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===


=== Singles ===
1979 – Superappin' (Enjoy 6001) Side A – Superappin'; Side B – Superappin' Theme
1980 – Freedom (Sugar Hill SH-549) Side A – vocal; Side B – instrumental
1981 – The Adventures of Grandmaster Flash on the Wheels of Steel (Sugar Hill SH-557)
1981 – Scorpio (Sugar Hill SH 118) Side A – vocal; Side B – instrumental
1982 – Flash To The Beat (Sugar Hill SH 574)
1984 – Jesse (Sugar Hill SH 133) Side A – vocal; Side B – instrumental
1984 – We Don't Work For Free (Sugar Hill SH 136) Side A – vocal; Side B – instrumental
1988 – Gold (edit) (Elektra EKR 70)
1996 – If U Wanna Party (feat. Carl Murray) (JAM 1002-8)


== Honors and awards ==
Grammys

Lifetime Achievement Award
Nominee Special MessageGlobal Spin Awards

Lifetime Achievement AwardRIAA

Hip-hop honoree award - RIAA Lifetime Achievement AwardGrammys

2012 Hall of Fame for Grandmaster Flash & The Furious Five single “The Message.”Urban Music Awards

2009, Lifetime Achievement AwardRock and Roll Hall of Fame

2007, InducteeBET Hip Hop Awards

2006, I Am Hip Hop Icon AwardPolar Music Prize

2019, awarded Sweden's Polar PrizeHonorary Doctorates Degree

2022, Buffalo State University


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Grandmaster Flash; David Ritz (2008). The Adventures of Grandmaster Flash: My Life, My Beats. Broadway Books. ISBN 978-0-7679-2475-7.


== External links ==

Official website
Grandmaster Flash's channel on YouTube
Grandmaster Flash discography at Discogs 
Grandmaster Flash at IMDb
Grandmaster Flash Interview at NAMM Oral History Collection (2019)Chaine St. Aubin Downer Jr. (born July 6, 1993), better known by his stage name CJ Fly, is an American rapper and producer from Brooklyn, New York City. He is a founding member and the oldest member of the hip-hop collective group Pro Era. Throughout 2012 and 2013, he was featured on many of the collective's projects and towards the end of 2013, he released his critically acclaimed mixtape Thee Way Eye See It.


== Early life ==
Downer Jr. was born on July 6, 1993, in Brooklyn, New York. He is the only child of a Bajan mother and Jamaican father. He began writing poetry by the fourth grade and by the seventh grade he began rapping. He attended Edward R. Murrow High School for communication arts where he met Joey Bada$$, Powers Pleasant and Capital STEEZ. The four of them would spend their school days cyphering in the auditorium. In 2011, the four of them formed Pro Era.


== Music career ==
In 2012, Pro Era released their debut mixtape The Secc$ Tape. CJ Fly later made a breakthrough feature on Joey Bada$$'s debut mixtape 1999, on tracks "Hardknock" and "Don't Front". On December 21, 2012, he and Pro Era released their second mixtape PEEP: The APROcalypse. With production from Pro Era members Chuck Strangers, Kirk Knight, Statik Selektah and others from Brandun DeShay, Thelonious Martin and more.In 2013, CJ went on the Beast Coastal Tour with fellow Pro Era members, The Flatbush Zombies and The Underachievers. He, along with the rest of Pro Era, joined Wiz Khalifa's Under The Influence Tour in 2013 with A$AP Rocky, Trinidad James, Chevy Woods, Smoke DZA, and more. He later made an appearance on Joey's second mixtape Summer Knights along with the rest of Pro Era on the song "Sorry Bonita" produced by Oddisee. On October 5, 2013, he released his debut mixtape Thee Way Eye See It. With features from various Pro Era members, Buckshot, Ab-Soul, Phife Dawg and production from Chuck Strangers, Statik Selektah, Brandun DeShay, and more, the mixtape has received critical acclaim and made him a candidate for XXL's 2014 and 2015 Freshman List.
On December 9, 2016, a date which happened to coincide with his mother's 49th birthday, CJ Fly released his debut studio album entitled Flytrap. He released the album exclusively with TIDAL on December 8, and made the album available on all streaming services on December 9.Since the release of FLYTRAP, CJ has released videos for single "Now You Know", a track that was premiered with Billboard in September 2016. He's also released the visual for "DOPE" which premiered on Pornhub on 4/20.
His single, "Now You Know" was featured in Love & Hip Hop Season 6 - Episode 7 (2017) On March 6, 2020, CJ Fly released his sophomore studio album entitled RUDEBWOY. Entirely produced by Statik Selektah, the album featured guest appearances from majority of the Pro Era collective, as well as Haile Supreme, Oshun, Conway the Machine and former Pro Era member T'nah.On January 18, 2021, CJ Fly released The Way I H(ear) It, Vol. 1; the first volume of his instrumental album series, inspired by the time he spent learning how to produce his own beats during the start of the COVID-19 lockdown in 2020.On August 24, 2021, a release date chosen in tribute of Kobe Bryant, CJ Fly released NOT WHAT YOU'RE EXPECTING. CJ's third studio album, the project featured no appearances from Pro Era, however brought in Devin Tracy, Amon Tyson, and Marlon Craft. The album also featured production from several producers, including CJ himself.


== Influences ==
CJ is influenced by The Notorious B.I.G., Nas, Jay-Z, A Tribe Called Quest, and MF DOOM.


== Discography ==
Studio albums

Flytrap (2016)
RUDEBWOY (2020)
NOT WHAT YOU'RE EXPECTING (2021)
Healing from Our Wounds (2023)Mixtapes

Thee Way Eye See It (2013)Instrumental albums

The Way I H(ear) It, Vol. 1 (2021)Pro Era discography

The Secc$ TaP.E. (2012)
P.E.E.P: The aPROcalypse (2012)
The Secc$ TaP.E. 2 (2014)
The Shift (2014)


== References ==

https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=CJ_Fly&action=edit&editintro=Template:BLP_editintroBernard Edwards Jr. (born November 6, 1972), professionally known as Focus..., is an American music producer from New York City. He gained major recognition in the music industry when he signed with Dr. Dre's Aftermath Entertainment, in 2002. Since then he has produced tracks for several prominent artists, including Dr. Dre, Eminem, Kendrick Lamar, Snoop Dogg, Rick Ross, John Legend, The Game, Ice Cube, Busta Rhymes, Fabolous, 50 Cent, Schoolboy Q, Joe, Christina Aguilera, Jennifer Lopez, Beyoncé, Lil Wayne, Ameriie, Christina Millian, Mac Dre, Marsha Ambrosius among others.


== Life and career ==
Focus... is the son of the late Bernard Edwards, co-founder of disco and R&B band Chic. He was born in Manhattan, New York City, and raised in the Tri-State Region. Edwards Jr. credits his father with his love for the production side of music, which he developed from an early age, attending numerous studio sessions with his father.Focus...'s production talents were first recognized by Dr. Dre when an artist Edwards Jr. had produced, Daks, greatly impressed the Aftermath label head. He later signed Focus... so that the two could then continue working together.The beginning of 2009 saw Focus leave Aftermath after seven years with the label.In 2014, Focus returned to Aftermath Entertainment as an official staff producer where he worked side by side with Dr. Dre and collaborators to help craft the Grammy nominated, highly anticipated album Compton. Compton was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA).
Focus is now the CEO of his own entertainment company N|VZXN Entertainment.


== Production ==


=== 1999 ===
Solé – Skin Deep"I'm Coming" (Intro)
"Spell My Name Right" (featuring Mr. Raja) (produced with Tricky Stewart)
"Antoine's Interlude" (produced with Tricky Stewart)
"Young Niggas" (produced with Tricky Stewart)
"Pain" (produced with Tricky Stewart)


=== 2000 ===
Joe – My Name Is Joe"Get Crunk Tonight"Kandi Burruss – Hey Kandi..."Introduction"
"Hey Kandi"
"Pants on Fire"
"Talking' Bout Me"
"Sucka for You"
"Outro"


=== 2001 ===
Christina Milian – Christina Milian"It Hurts When..." (produced with Montell Jordan)
"Twitch" (produced with Montell Jordan)Destiny's Child – 8 Days of Christmas"Spread a Little Love on Christmas Day" (produced with Beyoncé Knowles, Ric Wake)Various artists – The Wash"Riding High" (Daks featuring R.C.)


=== 2002 ===
Truth Hurts – Truthfully Speaking"Next To Me"
"Do Me"Jennifer Lopez – This Is Me... Then"Dear Ben" (produced with Cory Rooney)Petey Pablo – Drumline"Club Banger"Montell Jordan – Montell Jordan"MJ V Intro"
MJ Anthem
Top Or Bottom
"Mine, Mine, Mine" (included in Rush Hour 2)
Why Can’t We
The Rain


=== 2003 ===
Sly Boogy – Judgement Day"California" (featuring Butch Cassidy, Truth Hurts)Beyoncé Knowles – Dangerously in Love"Yes" (produced with Beyoncé Knowles)


=== 2004 ===
Petey Pablo – Still Writing in My Diary: 2nd Entry"Roll Off"Mac Dre – Ronald Dregan: Dreganomics"Get Stupid"Wylde Bunch – Wylde Tymes at Washington High"Our Lyfe"


=== 2005 ===
The Game – The Documentary"Where I'm From" (featuring Nate Dogg)112 – Pleasure & Pain"U Already Know" (produced with Sean Garrett)Outlawz – Outlaw 4 Life: 2005 A.P."Real Talk" (featuring Focus...)
"If You Want 2"
"I Dare U" (featuring Focus...)Sway & King Tech – Back 2 Basics"Watch Closer" (featuring Chino XL, Tracy Lane)
"I Don't Think So" (featuring Kam)
"We Don't Give A..." (featuring Kallihan, Hellraiza)
"Hands to the Sky" (featuring Verb & Rock)Tony Yayo – Thoughts of a Predicate Felon"Eastside Westside"
"Project Princess" (featuring Jagged Edge)
"Live by the Gun"


=== 2006 ===
Stat Quo – Eminem Presents: The Re-Up"By My Side"


=== 2007 ===
Bishop Lamont – N***** Noise"Klansmen"
"American Dreams"Salah Edin – Nederlands Grootste Nachtmerrie"NGN" (featuring Focus...)
"T.H.E.O. (Teleurstelling, Haat, Ergernis & Onbegrip)"
"Het Land Van..."
"Geliefd Om Gehaat Te Worden"
"Opgeblazen" (featuring Opgezwolle)
"0172"
"Zwarte Gat Op Het Witte Doek" (featuring Focus...)
"Geld" (featuring Caprice)
"Hosselaar"
"Vrouwtje Is Een Bitch"
"Samen Huilen, Samen Lachen"
"Koning Ter Rijk"
"Oog Om Oog" (featuring Probz)
"Paradijs Is Nu"La Fouine – Aller-Retour"Intro"
"La Danse Du Ghetto"
"C'est Pas La Peine"
"Contrôle Abusif"
"Laissez-Moi Dénoncer"
"Partout Pareil"Keke Palmer – So Uncool"The Game Song"
"Music Box"


=== 2008 ===
Girlicious – Girlicious"Mirror"Bishop Lamont – The Confessional"The Confessional" (Intro)
"Better Than You"
"The Name" (featuring Dirty Birdy, Kida, Flii Stylz)


=== 2009 ===
Busta Rhymes – Back on My B.S."Respect My Conglomerate" (featuring Lil Wayne, Jadakiss)
"If You Don't Know Now You Know" (featuring Big Tigger)Slaughterhouse – Slaughterhouse"Lyrical Murderers" (featuring K-Young)


=== 2010 ===
Christina Aguilera – Bionic"Morning Dessert" (Intro)
"Sex for Breakfast"Bishop Lamont – The Shawshank Redemption/Angola 3"Martin Luther King" (Intro)
"Affirmative Action" (featuring Focus...)


=== 2011 ===
Marsha Ambrosius – Late Nights & Early Mornings"Tears"Schoolboy Q – Setbacks"Light Years Ahead (Sky High)" (featuring Kendrick Lamar)Jay Rock – Follow Me Home"Bout That"Rapper Big Pooh – Dirty Pretty Things"Right With You" (featuring Focus...)
"Real Love" (featuring Focus...)Outlawz – Perfect Timing"Keep It Lit" (featuring Yung Phat Pat)


=== 2012 ===
50 Cent – 5 (Murder by Numbers)"My Crown"Busta Rhymes – Year of the Dragon"Do That Thing"Xzibit – Napalm"Killer's Remorse" (featuring Bishop Lamont, Young De, B-Real)Skyzoo – A Dream Deferred"Drew & Derwin" (featuring Raheem DeVaughn)TheKidJ Presents Handsonhiphop (The Street Album)"Love & Hip-hop" (featuring Redd Lettaz)


=== 2013 ===
TGT – Three Kings"Interlude" (credited as B. Edwards Jr.)Slum Village – Evolution"Summer Breeze"
"1 Nite" (featuring Vice)Terrace Martin – 3ChordFold"Watch U Sleep"


=== 2015 ===
Dr. Dre – Compton"Intro
"Loose Cannons" (featuring Xzibit, COLD 187 um & Sly Pyper)
"Issues" (featuring Ice Cube, Anderson .Paak & Dem Jointz)
"Deep Water" (featuring Kendrick Lamar, Anderson .Paak & Justus)
"One Shot One Kill" (Jon Connor featuring Snoop Dogg)
"Medicine Man" (featuring Eminem, Candice Pillay & Anderson .Paak)Wu-Tang Clan – Once Upon a Time in Shaolin"Hail, Snow & Earthquakes / Rainy Dayz II" (featuring Blue Raspberry)Ameriie – Drive"Every Time" (featuring Fabolous)


=== 2016 ===
DJ Mustard Presents – Cold Summer"Another Summer" (featuring Rick Ross, John Legend & James Fauntleroy)Damian Lillard – The Letter O"Thank You" (featuring Marsha Ambrosius, Brookfield Duece & Danny from Sobrante)


=== 2018 ===
Marsha Ambrosius – Nyla"Flood"
"I Got It Bad" (produced with Marsha Ambrosius and Stereotypes)
"Let Out"
"Today" (produced with Best Kept Secret)
"Grand Finale"


=== 2019 ===
Little Brother – May the Lord Watch"Black Magic (Make It Better)"
"Goodmorning Sunshine"
"Work Through Me" (produced with Blaaq Gold)


=== 2020 ===
Busta Rhymes –  Extinction Level Event 2: The Wrath of God"Don't Go" (featuring Q-Tip)Eminem –  Music to Be Murdered By – Side B (Deluxe edition)"She Loves Me"


=== 2022 ===
Diamond D - The Rear View"Live My Life" (featuring Ashtin Martin)


== References ==


== External links ==
Focus… at AllMusic
Focus… discography at Discogs
Focus… discography at MusicBrainz
Focus... on TwitterGeorge J. Hundall III (born March 4, 1997), better known by his stage name Q Da Fool, is an American rapper from Largo, Maryland signed to the label Roc Nation.


== Music career ==
Q Da Fool began his career in 2013 as part of the rap group Pakk Boyz. He released his first solo project Trap Fever in 2015. Following his departure he formed his own rap collective known as Rich Shootas in 2017. The rapper released four mixtapes throughout that year.He gained attention in 2017 following the release of his mixtape 100 Round Goon on May 17. On December 22, The Washington Post proclaimed 2017 as "The Greatest Year In DMV Rap History" and included Q Da Fool's single "Numbers" as part of its list of 25 songs, which also included fellow Pakk Boys alumn Shabazz PBG's track "Package".In February 2018, the rapper announced an EP titled 100 Keys with producer Zaytoven. On May 14, Billboard reported on Q Da Fool having signed a deal with Roc Nation. He later revealed "When I started working with my manager Terrance, who also works as Gucci Mane's manager, he was working with Zaytoven and told him about me. He sent me a beat and I did a song then sent it back. But he sent me like 50 beats!" He recorded the tracks he sent back in the span of a week at his home studio.


== References ==


== External links ==
Q Da Fool on TwitterMaxie Lee Ryles III (born March 29, 1990), known by his stage name Fivio Foreign, is an American rapper from New York. He rose to fame in 2019 with his single "Big Drip", which spawned a remix with Lil Baby and Quavo. He is signed to fellow New York rapper Mase's RichFish Records and Columbia Records.In May 2020, Ryles was featured on Drake's song "Demons", from his mixtape Dark Lane Demo Tapes, which charted at 34 on the Billboard Hot 100, earning him his first Billboard-charting single. Later that month, he collaborated with Lil Tjay and Pop Smoke on the song "Zoo York", which peaked at 65 on the Hot 100. In August 2021, he reached further recognition through his feature alongside Playboi Carti on Kanye West's single "Off the Grid", from his tenth studio album Donda, which peaked at number 11 on the Hot 100. Fivio's debut album B.I.B.L.E. was released on April 8, 2022.


== Early life ==
Ryles was born and raised in the East Flatbush section of Brooklyn. In his youth, he was sent to Connecticut during the summer as part of the Fresh Air Fund. He started rapping under the name "Lite Fivio" in 2011. In 2013, he changed his name to Fivio Foreign and formed a music collective with his friends under the name 800 Foreign Side.After Ryles's mother died, Ryles lived on the streets or with some friends and family members.


== Career ==
Ryles started gaining traction after the release of his single "Big Drip". The song was featured on his EPs Pain and Love (2019) and 800 B.C. (2020) In November, he signed a Seven Hundred Fifty Thousand Dollar record deal with Columbia Records, in conjunction with American rapper Mase's record label RichFish Records.In May 2020, Ryles earned his first two Billboard-charting singles, with features on "Demons" by Drake and "Zoo York" by Lil Tjay. The same month, Ryles launched the non-profit organization Foreignside Foundation, "geared towards providing beneficial resources and programs for at-risk youth, the homeless, current and former gang-affiliated individuals, incarcerated individuals".On August 11, 2020, Ryles was included on XXL's 2020 Freshman Class. Throughout the rest 2020, he appeared on a number of songs by other artists, including Nas' "Spicy", Tory Lanez's "K Lo K", French Montana's "That's a Fact (Remix)", and King Von's " I Am What I Am". In November 2020, he released the single "Trust". He also released the Christmas song "Baddie on My Wish List" on December 3, as part of Apple Music's holiday project Carols Covered.In 2021, He appeared on Kanye West's Donda on the songs "Off the Grid" alongside Playboi Carti and "Ok Ok" alongside Lil Yachty and Rooga. On February 11, 2022, he released the lead single to his debut album B.I.B.L.E., "City of Gods" with Kanye West and Alicia Keys, which was dedicated to his late friend T-Dott Woo. On the same day, the release date for his album B.I.B.L.E. was revealed to be March 25, 2022, but was eventually pushed back to April 8, 2022. On March 18, he released the second single for the album, "Magic City" featuring Quavo. On April 8, B.I.B.L.E. was released with features by A$AP Rocky, Polo G, Lil Yachty, Lil Tjay, and more. The album debuted at number 9 on the Billboard 200, with 29,000 equivalent album units derived from 37.75 million streams, but only 1,000 pure album sales. Ryles and fellow Brooklyn rapper 6ix9ine took to social media, comparing Ryles's B.I.B.L.E. with 6ix9ine's TattleTales album from 2020, which hit number 4 on the same chart but dropped to number 60 the next week.In July 2022 Ryles revealed in an interview that he was signed by Mase Into RichFish Records for only $5,000 and was still in the deal.


== Personal life ==
In 2016, Ryles's mother died from a stroke.
Ryles has two kids with his ex-girlfriend and an additional son with another woman. Ryles was friends with the late Pop Smoke and King Von who were both murdered in 2020. He was also close friends with T-Dott Woo, who was murdered on February 1, 2022.In 2022, a Florida rapper known as Mellow Rackz revealed that Fivio and herself are in a romantic relationship just weeks after Fivio broke up with his longtime girlfriend Jasmine.


== Discography ==

B.I.B.L.E. (2022)
TBA (Hosted By Yung Berg) (TBA)


== Awards and nominations ==


== References ==James Campbell (born March 27, 1969), better known by his stage names Freddie Foxxx and Bumpy Knuckles, is an American rapper and music producer from Long Island, New York.


== Biography ==
Foxxx got his start rapping in the early 1980s.
In 1986, he recorded "You Gotta Come Out Fresh / Handling Things" under the alias Freddie C. as a member of the Supreme Force (other members were Cool Cee and Easy E) on NIA Records. Later in 1986 he was slated to meet with producer Eric B. who was searching for an MC to pair up with; Foxxx missed the meeting, and Eric B. ended up pairing up with MC Rakim and forming the group Eric B. and Rakim.Despite this, Foxxx's first LP, Freddie Foxxx Is Here, was produced entirely by Eric B. and Foxxx, and was released in 1989 through MCA Records. He soon parted ways with the label and became a member of Queen Latifah's Flavor Unit establishment. In 1993, only promo copies of his second album, Crazy Like A Foxxx, were circulated when Epic Records decided to shelve it.Foxxx then began to be known more for his cameos on songs by Boogie Down Productions, Naughty by Nature, M.O.P., O.C. and, most notably, his appearance on Gang Starr's The Militia from their Moment of Truth album (1998). The song was issued as a single, building a buzz for Foxxx and helping him to prep for his next full-length release.This time around he applied the lessons he'd learned from previous experiences with major record labels, and went the independent route. The Industry Shakedown album featured production from hip hop heavyweights DJ Premier, Pete Rock and The Alchemist. The members of M.O.P. provided the album's only cameo.
After the success of Industry Shakedown, Foxxx released his fourth album, The Konexion (2003) via Barely Breaking Even. A less commercially successful affair, the album was nevertheless faithful to its predecessor in terms of style and content and featured contributions from frequent collaborator DJ Premier and DJ Clark Kent.
Foxxx made significant contributions to the WWE SmackDown! vs. Raw 2006 soundtrack. He contributed two songs, and made a guest appearance on another song. He also produced all of the hip hop songs. He also appeared on John Cena's WWE released album You Can't See Me.In 2006, Foxxx released his fifth album, Street Triumph.
In 2009, Foxxx released his sixth album, Amerikkan Black Man.
Bumpy Knuckles’ previously shelved second album Crazy Like a Foxxx finally saw a major official release on July 29, 2008 on Fat Beats Records.


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===
1989: Freddie Foxxx Is Here (MCA Records)
1994: Crazy Like a Foxxx (Fat Beats Records)
2000: Industry Shakedown (Landspeed Records)
2003: Konexion (BBE)
2006: Street Triumph (BBE)
2008: Crazy Like a Foxxx (Official Re-Release) (Fat Beats Records)
2009: Amerikkan Black Man (BBE)
2010: Music From The Man Vol.1 (with Jesse West)
2011: Royalty Check (with KRS-One)
2011: Lyrical Workout (with Statik Selektah)
2012: Kolexxxion (with DJ Premier) #US 195 #US R&B 31 #US Rap 22 #US Independent 33
2012: Ambition (with Statik Selektah)
2018: Pop Duke, Vol. 1 (Produced by Nottz)


=== Appearances ===
1986: "You Gotta Come Out Fresh"/"Handling Things" 12" release by Supreme Force (NIA Records) - No Album
1990: "Money in the Bank" (from the Kool G Rap & DJ Polo album Wanted:Dead or Alive)
1991: "Heal Yourself" (from the H.E.A.L. Foundation 12" single)
1992: "Ruff Ruff" and "The Original Way" (from the Boogie Down Productions album Sex and Violence)
1993: "Hot Potatoe" (from the Naughty by Nature album 19 Naughty III)
1994: "One of Those Nightz" (from The Almighty RSO EP Revenge of da Badd Boyz)
1997: "Win the G (as Bumpy Knuckles)" (from the O.C. album Jewelz)
1997: "M.U.G. (as Freddie Foxxx)" (from the O.C. album Jewelz)
1998: "The Militia" (from the Gang Starr album Moment of Truth)
1998: "I Luv" (from the M.O.P. album First Family 4 Life)
1998: "M.O.B" (from the Hussein Fatal album In the Line of Fire)
2000: "Keith & Bumpy (as Bumpy Knuckles)" (from the Kool Keith album Matthew)
2000: "U Don't Wanna B.D.S." (from the De La Soul album Art Official Intelligence: Mosaic Thump)
2001: "Mind Frame" (from the Pete Rock album PeteStrumentals)
2001: "How We Ride" (from Da Beatminerz album Brace 4 Impak)
2002: "Scram" (from the DJ Jazzy Jeff album The Magnificent)
2003: "Capture (Militia Pt. 3)" (from the Gang Starr album The Ownerz, also featuring Big Shug)
2003: "Misery" (from the Lordz of Brooklyn album Graffiti Roc, also featuring IP)
2005: "Flow Easy", "Keep Frontin'", "Know the Rep", and "Bad, Bad Man" (from the John Cena album You Can't See Me)
2008: "If We Can't Build" (from Akrobatik album Absolute Value)
2008: "Prison Planet" (from the East Coast Avengers album Prison Planet)
2008: "Damage" (feat. Blaq Poet) (from the DJ Revolution album King of the Decks)
2009: "Bumpy's Message" (skit on the MF DOOM album Born Like This)
2009: "B. Boy" (feat. Big Scoob, Kutt Calhoun & Skatterman) (from the Tech N9ne album K.O.D.)
2010: "Take Money" (feat. Rock) (from the Marco Polo & Ruste Juxx album The eXXecution)
2011: "DAMU" (feat. Skatterman, Messy Marv & Jay Rock) (from the Big Scoob album Damn Fool)
2012: "Dumpin' Em All" (from the DJ Nu-Mark album Broken Sunlight)
2014: "It's Nothin'" (feat. Chi-Ali & Fat Joe) (from the Diamond D album The Diam Piece)
2014: "The Beast" (from The Audible Doctor album Can't Keep the People Waiting)
2016: "Cold Freezer" (from the Kool Keith album Feature Magnetic)
2016: "Downward Spiral" (feat. Onyx) (from the Ras Kass album Intellectual Property: #SOI2)
2016: "A.B.N" (feat. Killer Mike) (from the Big Scoob album H.O.G.)
2017: "4 Tha OG'z" (from the MC Eiht album Which Way Iz West)
2018: "Going Crazy" (from the Myzery album PARA LA ISLA 20TH ANNIVERSARY EDITION)
2019: "Veterans Day" (feat. B-Real) (from the Frank n Dank album St. Louis)
2019: "Take Flight (Militia, Pt. 4)" (ft. Big Shug) (from the Gang Starr album One of the Best Yet)


== Filmography ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Freddie Foxxx at IMDb
Freddie Foxxx discography at DiscogsNjena Reddd Foxxx was the stage name of Washington, D.C. artist Njena Surae Jarvis, active from 2012 to 2013.


== Life and career ==


=== 2012: Ima Read ===
Originally from Washington, D.C., Jarvis moved to New York in 2000. She performed on Ojay Morgan's 2012 single "Ima Read". The song was recorded in one night, directly into a computer microphone, and hasn't been re-recorded since. On January 18, 2012, the song manifested into a music video directed by Ruben XYZ and quickly became a viral underground sensation.

In May 2013, Jarvis and Katz opened for Die Antwoord and toured European festivals through August. The duo opened for the British leg of Azealia Banks's Fantasea tour in late 2012. "Ima read" also became the soundtrack for Rick Owens' and Alex Mattsson's Fall-Winter 2012/2013 and Fall-Winter 2013 collections, respectively.


=== 2013: Needful Things ===
Following the unexpected success of "Ima Read", Jarvis began penning several songs under her Reddd Foxxx persona, releasing them periodically on her SoundCloud account.
In September 2013, Jarvis was featured in a short film, modeling for British designer Kitty Joseph in association with Absolut Vodka. Jarvis' single "Watercolour" was used throughout the film. On December 15, 2013, Jarvis released her debut EP Needful Things, in collaboration with London-based producer Jepordise.


== Discography ==


=== Extended plays ===
Needful Things (2013)


=== Singles ===
"Ima Read" (with Zebra Katz) (2012)
"Silly Bitch" (2012)
"Flex" (2012)
"Hold My Purse" (feat. Goodluck) (2012)
"Dominos" (2012)
"Watercolour" (2013)


== Music videos ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Njena Reddd Foxxx on SoundCloud
Njena Reddd Foxxx on Twitter
Njena Reddd Foxxx on YouTubePaul William "Sage" Francis (born November 18, 1976) is an American independent underground rapper from Providence, Rhode Island. He is the founder and CEO of Strange Famous Records.


== Early life and education ==
Francis was born in Miami, Florida, but grew up in Providence, Rhode Island. He is an only child and grew up for most of his childhood with his mother and stepfather after his parents divorced when he was young. He lived in different parts of Rhode Island including North Smithfield and Woonsocket. His mom worked as a bartender and his stepfather worked as a locksmith.Francis began writing and recording original lyrics at age 8, being inspired by acts such as Run DMC and Public Enemy. According to Artistdirect, Francis began sneaking out of his parents' house at age 12 to participate in rap battles.Francis received a degree in communications from Dean College in Franklin, Massachusetts and a degree in journalism from the University of Rhode Island.


== Career ==
In 1996, he recorded his first official demo tape, and by 1998 he had a radio show on WRIU called True School Session.
Francis won the Superbowl MC Battle in Boston in 1999, beating Esoteric. Francis won the Scribble Jam emcee battle in 2000, beating Blueprint.In 2001, the song "Makeshift Patriot," recorded on October 11, 2001, became an Internet hit for its critique of American media during and immediately following the September 11 attacks. Francis considers "Makeshift Patriot" to be the song that really made things come together for him. It was on the 2002 mix tape, The Known Unsoldier – Sick Of Waging War... and was widely circulated for free.He released the critically acclaimed first solo album Personal Journals in 2002. The record Hope, his only album with Joe Beats released under the name Non-Prophets, was named after the state of Rhode Island's motto of hope, and was meant to be very Rhode Island-centric.Francis broke music genre barriers by getting signed to Epitaph Records, making himself the first hip hop artist to sign with the punk rock label. He released three albums with Epitaph: A Healthy Distrust, Human the Death Dance and Life.Francis has described A Healthy Distrust as being a political record, which reflected his mistrust of government and big business with a focus on socio-political matters.In May 2007, a music video of the song "Got Up This Morning" from Human the Death Dance was released. The song featured vocals by Jolie Holland and beats produced by Buck 65. The video featured cameos from B. Dolan, Brother Ali, Buck 65, Divinci from Solillaquists of Sound, Holland, Slug, and Tom Inhaler from Francis' band and Strange Famous RecordsLife was a shift into a different style for Francis, focusing on spoken word and indie rock. The record featured contributions and collaborations with Califone, Chris Walla, Jason Lytle, and Mark Linkous.Francis made a guest appearance on Bad Religion's The Empire Strikes First, on the track "Let Them Eat War".
In 2014, Francis released Copper Gone after a four-year break from touring. The album was named after the phenomenon Francis saw in his neighborhood where abandoned buildings would have their copper pipes stripped to be sold, and then tagged as "Copper Gone" to let others know that there was no copper left to steal.Francis says that he has been releasing mix tapes consistently since 1999, and will continue to release the Sick of... mix tape series on an ongoing basis.Francis has toured extensively, and has performed shows with Atmosphere, Brother Ali, and Eyedea & Abilities.


== Epic Beard Men ==
Francis collaborated with B. Dolan under the name Epic Beard Men. The duo's official debut single, "War on Christmas", was released in 2017. In 2018, the duo released the Season 1 EP, as well as "Five Hearts", a single from the EP. In 2019, the duo released the first studio album, This Was Supposed to Be Fun. It includes "You Can't Tell Me Shit", which became The Stranger's "Inbox Jukebox Track of the Day". The album was placed at number 20 on PopMatters' "20 Best Hip-Hop Albums of 2019" list.


== Strange Famous Records ==

Francis is the founder and CEO of the independent hip hop record label Strange Famous Records. The label first began in 1996 as a way for him to release his previously unreleased songs in the late 1990s. It has since evolved into an official enterprise with an expanding roster of like-minded artists. He released several Sick Of mixtapes available on his website.


== Social activism ==
Francis worked with fellow rapper B. Dolan who had the idea to start an organization and website named KnowMore.org aka KnowMore: The People's Corporation Watch Project which focused on connecting consumers with social responsibility information about corporations and responsible consumerism.Francis went to South Africa to work on solutions to AIDS in South Africa, especially in regards to children. As part of that effort he was part of a documentary on HIV in South Africa.


== Other work ==
Francis is also part of the contemporary spoken word movement. His relationship with the Providence poetry slam community (he was on their 1998, 1999 and 2002 national poetry slam teams) led to it being called "The House that Sage Francis Built." From 2000 to 2002, he also DJ-ed for the NYC-Urbana poetry slam, a weekly slam series held at the legendary punk rock venue CBGB.


== Discography ==

Studio albumsVoice Mail Bomb Threat (1998) (with Art Official Intelligence)
Personal Journals (Anticon, 2002)
Hope (Lex, 2003) (with Joe Beats, as Non-Prophets)
A Healthy Distrust (Epitaph, 2005)
Human the Death Dance (Epitaph, 2007)
Li(f)e (Anti-, 2010)
Copper Gone (Strange Famous, 2014)
This Was Supposed to Be Fun (Strange Famous, 2019) (with B. Dolan, as Epic Beard Men)


== References ==


== External links ==

Sage Francis at Strange Famous Records
Strange Famous Records
Sage Francis on Twitter 
Sage Francis at Epitaph RecordsRory William Quigley (born January 26, 1987), known professionally as Harry Fraud, is an American record producer. Primarily a hip hop producer, Fraud began producing at an early age and began interning at a recording studio after graduating high school. First discovered by French Montana during a recording session in Chinatown in early 2009, Fraud has gone on to become a fixture in the New York underground and mixtape scene. He gained mainstream attention when his song with French Montana "Shot Caller" became one of the most added tracks on urban contemporary radio during 2011–2012.Fraud has produced collaborative records with various rappers, such as Wiz Khalifa before projects such as Flight 2011 (2011) with Chinx Drugz; Rugby Thompson (2012) with Smoke DZA; Cigarette Boats (2012) with Currensy, which was awarded XXL's "2012 EP of the Year"; Saaab Stories (2013) with Action Bronson, which served as the latter's major-label debut, and The Appetizer (2014) with French Montana. On March 8, 2013, he released his debut mixtape Adrift. That same year, Fraud teamed up with car-maker Scion to produce the compilation EP Scion A/V Presents: High Tide released on May 7, and on May 10 released his instrumental EP Royal Palm. In April 2014, he released his instrumental EP Blue/Green. Fraud has done production for various high-profile artists such as Rick Ross, Prodigy, Pusha T, Playboi Carti and Talib Kweli, among others. He has also worked on production for the International Emmy Awards.


== Career ==


=== Early life and career ===
Harry Fraud comes from a musical family background, where his parents performed in a band together. His father is a guitar player, while his mother is a singer. His father was in the concert business, which gave Fraud access to instruments and recording equipment at an early age. He received his first turntables on Christmas, and the next year had gotten what he describes as a "piece of shit sampler". It's after acquiring his first MPC that he began seriously working on beat production.Upon graduating high school, Fraud began interning at a recording studio, which became his first exposure to Pro Tools.  He was also influenced by Fafu of BlesteNation, who was a producer at the same building. After getting into college, he acquired Pro Tools for himself, quickly immersing himself in front of the computer and becoming his main distraction, "I didn't do any [school] work. I wouldn't even go to class. It was terrible," claimed Fraud in an interview with Nah Right. During his time in college, he met his friend Red Walrus – now the musical director of the band which Fraud works with – where the two bonded over digging through crates and buying vinyl records from places such as Goodwill and the Salvation Army. His musical composition has been used by the International Emmy Awards, which Fraud credits his father for getting through to its producers. Fraud's composition work would go on to be praised by Simon Cowell, who, at the 2010 Emmy Awards ceremony took notice of Fraud's walk up music, even requesting it be replayed briefly during his speech.


=== French Montana and the Coke Boys ===
Harry Fraud rose to prominence through his collaboration with French Montana on the song "New York Minute", featuring Jadakiss, off of French's fifth mixtape Mac Wit Da Cheese released on April 19, 2009. In a 2013 interview with Rolling Stone magazine, Harry Fraud revealed first meeting close friend and artist French Montana during a recording session at a studio in Chinatown. Fraud recalls recording a song for someone which French happened to have a guest feature on. In an unusual turn of events, the building was raided by police after a tip-off that there were counterfeit Gucci and Louis Vuitton purses being manufactured at the same building. Having lost his studio spot, Fraud went on to form his own studio in Brooklyn, where the two "met and formed a bond".Following the release of "New York Minute", the two artists would go on to record "We Playin In The Wind" off of French Montana's sixth mixtape The Laundry Man 2, released on June 29, 2009. An extended version of the song would be included on French's seventh mixtape Cocaine Konvicts released on September 25. Since then, Harry Fraud's production has been a staple among French's music, becoming Fraud's gateway to working with other high-profile artists since then. With the success of "New York Minute", rapper Ma$e had approached French Montana to hop on the remix, released on French's eighth mixtape Coke Wave 2 in November that year. Fraud would go on to produce several tracks off of French's ninth mixtape Mac & Cheese 2 released on May 6, 2010, and French's tenth mixtape Coke Boys released on September 15, collaborating with Coke Boys rappers Chinx Drugz, Cheeze, Flip and Brock.
He gained mainstream attention when his track with French Montana "Shot Caller" became one of the most added tracks on urban contemporary radio in 2011–2012. The song which was re-released as a single on January 10, 2012, was originally off of French's eleventh mixtape Mister 16: Casino Life released on February 15, 2011. Harry Fraud executive produced the overall mixtape, and his subsequent twelfth mixtape Coke Boys 2 released on August 19 of that same year. Through French, Fraud was introduced to his fellow Coke Boy rapper Chinx Drugz. The two would go on to work on their collaborative mixtape Flight 2011 which was released on March 11, 2011, and several tracks off of his subsequent Cocaine Riot mixtape released on April 19 that year. Fraud's production would also be included in French's collaborative mixtape with Juicy J and Project Pat Cocaine Mafia released on December 20, 2011. By 2012, with the popularity of "Shot Caller", a remix was released featuring rappers Rick Ross and Diddy.


=== 2012–present: Cigarette Boats, Adrift and Saaab Stories ===
On July 10, 2012, Fraud and rapper Currensy released a collaborative EP mixtape titled Cigarette Boats, which XXL would go on to award its "2012 EP of the Year." On March 8, 2013, Fraud released his debut mixtape titled Adrift, that has 115,000 downloads as of April 21, 2013, on DatPiff. The mixtape features guest appearances from Action Bronson, Bun B, Slim Thug, Rick Ross, French Montana, Prodigy, Wiz Khalifa, Juicy J, Kool G Rap, Trae tha Truth, Mac Miller, Chinx Drugz, Currensy, Chevy Woods, Danny Brown and Pusha T among many others. The mixtape is entirely self-produced and does not include any vocals of his.On April 8, 2013, Fraud and rapper Eddie B released a collaborative EP mixtape titled Horsepower through Man Bites Dog Records. Fraud also released an EP through Scion AV on May 7, 2013, titled Scion A/V Presents: High Tide. The free EP features guest appearances by Earl Sweatshirt, Tech N9ne, French Montana, Action Bronson, Riff Raff, Mistah F.A.B., Troy Ave, Smoke DZA and Chinx Drugz. On the same day he released an EP on iTunes of instrumentals all produced by himself titled Royal Ralm. On June 11, 2013, Fraud released his collaboration project with Action Bronson titled, Saaab Stories. The project featured collaborations with Raekwon, Wiz Khalifa and Prodigy. It debuted at #63 on the Billboard 200.
On July 22, 2013, it was announced that Fraud's Surf School record label signed to the new Priority Records which operates under Capitol Music Group. He has promised a project with French Montana to be released after Montana's album Excuse My French (2013). He also revealed plans to release a collaboration mixtape with Riff Raff and his debut album in late 2013. Fraud and Eddie B also announced they would release a full-length album titled Paper, Piff & Polo during 2013. On October 6, 2013, Smoke DZA announced he would release a collaboration EP with Currensy, entirely produced by Harry Fraud. He has said he wants to work with New York rappers Jay-Z and Cam'ron in the future. Fraud has called The Alchemist as his favorite producer.


== Production style ==
Harry Fraud's production has been described as "New York tinged, sample heavy, foggy music." Fraud's production leans heavily on samples, and he's become known for turning obscure tracks into hard-knocking beats. In an interview with HipHopDX Fraud described his style saying, "What's most important to me with production is that I'm just always trying to do something unique. If I approach a production—whether it be sample-based or starting with something that originates in my head—I always try to do it in a way that is not typical at all. So if it's something that I feel where I might be going down a path that sounds too much like what's going on now, I'll make sure to try and take a left turn and do something that's my own. I try not to have a style, so to speak." He went on to describe the use of drums on his beats stating, "I'm more about trying to have a strong drum presence—whether the drum is a big, huge snare or a little, tiny rimshot—I wanna make sure that the presence of the drums is felt no matter what." Fraud's signature tag at the beginning of his productions consists of singer Fanesha Fabre saying "La musica de Harry Fraud".


== Surf School Recordings ==
In 2012, Harry Fraud founded his own record label "Surf School Recordings", the name a tribute to Max B and Fraud's own passion for surfing. His father, who was a frequent traveler, was a surfer who would often take Fraud on trips with him where he discovered his passion for surfing. In 2013, Fraud signed a deal making it an imprint under Priority Records. In a 2014 interview with Life+Times he noted,

The SRFSCHL label comes from the concept of what Max B brought to the light with "the wave" and his philosophy and what me and French have been carrying on. It also kind of came out of me being into surfing. I feel like people get a lot of influence off of the stuff we do. We're teaching people how to ride the wave anyway, just off of them listening to our music. I'm a deeply philosophical person, so SRFSCHL has since taken on many different meanings.


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===


=== Mixtapes ===


== References ==Frederick Thomas (February 22, 1985 – April 23, 2020), known as Fred the Godson, was an American DJ and rapper from The Bronx, New York. He was the first high-profile hip hop personality to have died from COVID-19 in April 2020; the early stages of the pandemic.


== Early life ==
Frederick Thomas was born on February 22, 1985, and grew up in The Bronx, New York City. He gained an early nickname of "Big Bronx".He started freestyling in the early 2000s.


== Career ==
Thomas's music was characterized by his husky voice, humorous wordplay, and creative rhymes. In the early-2010s, he released two mixtapes; his debut was Armageddon in 2010, featuring samples of The Notorious B.I.G., Busta Rhymes and Cam'ron. His second release, City of God, was one of a series for DJ Drama's Gangsta Grillz, and featuring Pusha T and Raekwon.In 2011, XXL included him in its annual Freshman class of up-and-comers.Between 2011 and 2020, Thomas released music and performed regularly, guest DJ-ing on New York radio station based in Hudson Hot 97, and collaborated with artists including Pusha T, Jadakiss, Cam'ron, and Raekwon, as well as releasing the answer song, "Monique's Room". He released two additional mixtapes in 2020, Training Day in January with Jay Pharoah, and Payback, released on March 20, 2020, which would be his last release before his death from COVID-19 one month later.


== Personal life ==
Thomas was married to LeeAnn Jemmott; they had two daughters.Thomas was reported to be suffering from acute asthma and kidney problems, after contracting COVID-19 during the COVID-19 pandemic in New York (state), and by April 6, 2020, his fever had abated in hospital, according to his publicist and his Instagram account. His wife told media on April 9 that she was concerned he was going to die, but the next day, said he was "going to make it", and was being weaned from a ventilator.Thomas died at Montefiore Medical Center on April 23, 2020, due to complications of COVID-19. He was 35.


=== Legacy ===
On February 22, 2021, what would've been his 36th birthday, Bronx Borough President Rubén Díaz Jr. honored Fred by giving him his own street co-name on the block of his childhood home that he grew up in. Special appearances were made by Sway Calloway, Fat Joe, Jim Jones, Jaquae, Mysonne and Justina Valentine.


== Discography ==
Armageddon (2010)
City of God (2011)
Gordo Frederico (2012)
Contraband (2013)
Fat Boy Fresh (2014)
Contraband II (2016)
Gordo (2017)
Gorilla Glue (2019) (with Joell Ortiz and The Heatmakerz)
God Level (2019)
Training Day (2020) (with Jay Pharoah)
Payback (2020)
Ascension (2021) (posthumous)


== References ==


== External links ==
Fred the Godson at IMDb
Obituary on N-TV (in German)
Fred the Godson on SpotifyEzekiel Giles (born October 13, 1975), better known by his stage name Freekey Zekey, is an American rapper and music executive best known as a founding member of The Diplomats, a group he helped form in Harlem in 1997 alongside his childhood friend Jim Jones and cousin Cam'ron. Freekey also serves as the owner/CEO of 730 Dips Records.Aside from The Diplomats, he is also a member of fellow rapper Jim Jones' ByrdGang, and has made a habit of yelling his name in songs; it is his signature on tracks, whether he is featured or the solo artist.


== Career ==
Giles, along with his cousin Cam'ron and their friend Jim Jones formed the hip-hop group The Diplomats in their hometown of Harlem, New York in 1997. Giles adopted the stage name Freekey Zekey and the group began writing and performing songs together. In the early years of the group, Zekey served mostly as a hype man, yelling adlibs or his name during other members' songs and performances. Zekey was responsible for writing and performing almost all of the skits on Diplomat mixtapes and Cam'ron's albums, and did this until he was sentenced to 35–42 months in prison in February 2004. While in prison, Zekey began writing his own songs and honed his skills as a rapper. Just a few weeks after being released from prison in November 2006, Freekey signed a contract with Asylum Records to release his debut album, Book of Ezekiel. The album was released on July 24, 2007, and featured guest appearances from other members of The Diplomats, including Cam'ron, Jim Jones and Juelz Santana. The album peaked at #23 on the Billboard Top R&B/Hip Hop Albums chart. After The Diplomats effectively disbanded in 2007, Freekey went on to form his own label/group, the 730 Dips, and also joined Jim Jones' new group, ByrdGang.


== Personal life ==
Giles is the first cousin of Cam’ron, and was a childhood friend of Jim Jones and Damon Dash.


=== 2003 shooting ===
On April 25, 2003, Giles and his crew were involved in a minor car collision outside of a Manhattan nightclub, after another car collided with the back of the vehicle Giles and his crew were inside. After stepping out of their vehicle, the men in the other car attempted to rob Giles and his friends. Giles was shot once in the abdomen and sustained minor injuries after the incident. In total, over 44 bullets were fired at Giles and his crew during the altercation, and one member of Giles’ entourage, his bodyguard Eric Mangrum, was killed. In December 2005, Chauncey Dillon was sentenced to 30 years in prison for both robbery and the murder of Mangrum.


== Legal issues ==
Giles was sentenced to 35–42 months in prison on February 5, 2004, for running an ecstasy ring. Giles served 33 months at the Durham Correctional Center in Durham, North Carolina before being released on November 20, 2006.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===


=== Mixtapes ===
2006: Kiss my Browneye
2007: Henry
2008: Blame It on the Henny
2008: Henny & a Cigarette
2010: Gangsta Ambition


=== Singles ===


==== As lead artist ====


==== As featured artist ====


=== Guest appearances ===


== References ==

[1]


== External links ==

[2]
Freekey Zekey on TwitterGreg Hogan (born May 15, 1985), better known by his stage name Frenchie, is an American rapper. He was in Gucci Mane's 1017 Brick Squad and So Icey Boyz and Waka Flocka Flame's Brick Squad Monopoly. Frenchie is credited for introducing Nicki Minaj and French Montana to Debra's Mizay Entertainment before their mainstream breakouts.  He is currently serving a twelve year prison sentence after being convicted of burglary charges in Suffolk County.


== Early life ==
Frenchie was born and raised in Queens, New York. He spent much of his life travelling back and forth between Queens and Atlanta. His cousin is Southern rapper Waka Flocka Flame. His childhood friend is East Coast rapper Lloyd Banks, and his neighbors included other members who founded G-Unit namely Tony Yayo and 50 Cent. According to interviews Frenchie's father Big Frenchie was a notable gangster and drug dealer in borough in the early 1990s who 50 Cent referenced and idolized in his earlier work most notably on 50 Bars and Ghetto Quran. Frenchie wanted to become a rapper having been inspired after watching Kris Kross' song "Jump" on Video Music Box at an early age. He is of Guyanese ancestry.


== Career ==
Frenchie hails from a musical family background with several of his relatives in the industry. His cousin Bimmy was an A&R for Def Jam Recordings while his uncle from his father's side DJ Hurricane worked with Beastie Boys. His cousin/aunt Debra Antney was manager to Gucci Mane and OJ Da Juiceman. Frenchie was rapping when he was 19 and would go on to record his first professionally produced track Shirt Off in late 2008. Prior to the record appeared in various street DVDs performing freestyles and cyphers.


== 2008–2011: So Icey Entertainment, So Icey Boyz and 1017 Brick Squad ==
During a trip to Atlanta to attend a family reunion Frenchie's aunt Debra Antney had introduced him to Gucci Mane who signed him to his So Icey Entertainment. The song "Shirt Off" from Gucci Mane's The Movie mixtape released in September 2008 which featured Frenchie, Wooh Da Kid and OJ da Juiceman as So Icey Boyz – would be Frenchie's breakout track becoming a hit on Atlanta radio. Since then he had been managed by Debra Antney's Mizay Entertainment.
Frenchie released his debut mixtape French Connection on February 22, 2009, hosted by DJ Big Mike and Trap-A-Holics. Later in the year his camp would go on to form 1017 Brick Squad. His second mixtape Chicken Room, released on September 15, would be his first under the new imprint. Frenchie would be featured on "Candy Lady" from Gucci Mane's The Burrprint released in October 2009 alongside OJ da Juiceman, Wooh Da Kid and Waka Flocka Flame which would be the second and last time 1017 Brick Squad collaborated on one song since Shirt Off the year prior.According to interviews Frenchie has been the one to introduce Nicki Minaj to Debra Antney who then became her manager,prior to the latter's mainstream breakout. In an interview with DJ Lazy K in December 2009 Frenchie announced plans for an upcoming collaborative tape with French Montana. Although the tape never materialized, Montana would go on to collaborate with Frenchie and others from Brick Squad the following year. Frenchie had introduced Montana to Debra who would sign him later in the year. In March 13, 2010, Frenchie's friend and frequent collaborator G-Baby was shot and killed in Jamaica, Queens. The two had collaborated on several tracks off of Frenchie's fifth mixtape Trap To The Future released on March 29, and his sixth mixtape French Connection Part 2 released on July 18.


== 2011–2014: Brick Squad Monopoly ==
Starting in 2011 Frenchie would spend most of his time in Atlanta and touring with 1017 Brick Squad and Mizay Entertainment. That year Waka Flocka Flame would go on to form Brick Squad Monopoly with Frenchie as one of the original members. He released his eighth mixtape Bringing Gangsta Back on June 25 and his ninth mixtape Concrete Jungle on October 17. In December 2011, fellow BSM member Slim Dunkin was shot to death during an altercation. In 2012 Frenchie released his tenth mixtape French-Elo Anthony on March 10, and his eleventh mixtape Concrete Jungle 2 on December 17.On May 21, 2013, he released his twelfth mixtape Long Over Due aptly titled so having felt the need to showcase a solo effort with fewer guest features compared to his previous records. Later that year, Gucci Mane and Waka Flocka Flame would become embroiled in a rather public falling-out, with Frenchie noticeably on the side of his cousin Waka Flocka. However, when asked about the incident a year later, Frenchie affirmed that the event was blown out of proportion by the media and they were all currently on good terms. In 2013 Frenchie released singles Power Move and Don't Know Em which peaked at Mediabase urban charts at #44 and #89, respectively. He appeared on MTV's RapFix Live on March 27, and on the VH1 show Black Ink Crew which aired on October 7. On December 29, his cousin and fellow BSM member KayO Redd committed suicide. KayO who is Debra's youngest son died from a self-inflicted gunshot.
In 2014 Frenchie released a collaborative mixtape entitled Underrated with D-Dash on January 14, and released his fourteenth mixtape Long Over Due 2 on March 3. It would be his last releases under Brick Squad Monopoly and manager Debra Antney with Frenchie venturing off under his own label later in the year. Having accompanied Waka Flocka Flame, Steve Aoki and Borgore on tour the year before, he also showed a new-found interest in EDM which he expressed plans to pursue in the future.


== 2014–present: Protekted Records ==
On September 9, 2014, Frenchie announced he was joining Protekted Records an independent label he helped found with Karen Fraiberg and Jon Gornbein. Under the new management, he would go on to release his fifteenth mixtape on September 16 entitled Fukk Fame. That year, he released the single Ain't Goin Nowhere featuring B.o.B and Chanel West Coast, which peaked at #29 on Mediabase urban charts. In 2015, Frenchie released a collaborative mixtape entitled Phil Jackson with his Artist rapper/producer Jusjoose on November 8. His seventeenth mixtape Chicken Room 2 came out in 2015.


== Criminal conviction ==
On June 22, 2022, Frenchie was convicted in Suffolk County of burglary for an armed home invasion which occurred in 2021. Frenchie was determined to have been one of seven men, some armed with handguns, who entered the home of a sleeping family because they incorrectly believed there was $100,000 worth of marijuana inside. On April 6, 2023, Frenchie was sentenced to twelve years in prison for this crime.


== Discography ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official Twitter
Official SoundcloudChristopher Wong Won (May 29, 1964 – July 13, 2017), better known by his stage name Fresh Kid Ice, was a Trinidadian-American rapper and a Miami bass pioneer. Wong Won was born and spent his early childhood in Port of Spain, Trinidad and Tobago, before emigrating to the United States. In his early twenties, Wong Won was in the United States Air Force and he co-founded 2 Live Crew while he was stationed in California. Early 2 Live Crew singles gained so much traction in Florida that they relocated there. By 1986, the group released the single "Throw The 'D'"; it is now considered the blueprint of Miami bass.
Later in 1986, 2 Live Crew released their debut album, The 2 Live Crew Is What We Are. The album established the group's signature style of comical sexually explicit lyrics. After a slew of successful releases the group met with considerable controversy as a U.S. district court ruled the album legally obscene. They were prosecuted, but all later acquitted. After the group's first separation in the early 1990s, different incarnation of 2 Live Crew took place for their subsequent albums, Wong Won is the only one to appear in all of them.
Wong Won was the first prominent Asian and Asian American rapper, releasing his first solo album, The Chinaman, in 1992. In the 2000s, he continued touring and releasing singles with 2 Live Crew. Wong Won's last projects, before his death in 2017, were his autobiography My Rise 2 Fame (2015) and the compilation Breaking Glass Ceilings Volume 1 (2017).


== Early life ==
Wong Won was born in Port of Spain, Trinidad and Tobago on May 29, 1964. His family is of Chinese and Afro-Trinidadian ancestry, with his Asian heritage originating primarily in Hong Kong. Wong Won and his family were Catholic.In 1976, at the age of 12, Wong Won and his family emigrated from Trinidad and Tobago to the United States, settling in Brooklyn, New York City. In 1982, Wong Won graduated from Samuel J. Tilden High School in Brooklyn.


== Career ==


=== 1984: Military service, founding 2 Live Crew and Asian Hip hop pioneer ===

According to Wong Won, he joined the United States Air Force in 1982, while stationed in March Air Force Base near Riverside, California. Wong Won met fellow Airmen Yuri Vielot (Amazing Vee) and David Hobbs (Mr. Mixx), with whom he formed the rap group 2 Live Crew. Wong Won recounted that the group would perform in small, local venues on weekends, unbeknownst to their superiors.In 1985, 2 Live Crew released the single "The Revelation", which became popular in Florida, so much so that they relocated to Miami, minus Vielot who left the group, at the behest of local concert promoter Luther Campbell, after Wong Won and Hobbs were discharged from the Air Force.With the subsequent success of 2 Live Crew, Wong Won became the first rapper of note in Asian American hip hop, and the first rapper of Asian heritage to gain notoriety.


=== 1985–1986: Miami Bass pioneer and 2 Live Crew's breakthrough ===

In 1985, 2 Live Crew released their next single, "What I Like" on Fresh Beat Records, with Wong Won appearing as the only rapper on the track.  That same year, 2 Live Crew entered into a joint venture with Miami-based rap producer Luther Campbell who formed Luke Skyywalker Records with the group. Shortly after forming the record label, Campbell joined 2 Live Crew as producer, artist, and hype man. In April of that same year, 1985, rapper Brother Marquis (Mark D. Ross) joined 2 Live Crew, forming the most well known and recognized line up of the group (Wong Won, Ross, Hobbs, and Campbell).
In January 1986, 2 Live Crew released the single "Throw The 'D'", the rap was performed and the lyrics were written by Wong Won. The single became an influential blueprint as to how future Miami bass songs were written and produced.On July 25, 1986, the reconfigured 2 Live Crew became popular locally and nationally with the release of their Gold-certified debut album, The 2 Live Crew Is What We Are.  Notorious for sexually explicit lyrics, that made many DJs of the time uncomfortable.


=== 1988–1991: Subsequent fame and controversy ===

In 1988, 2 Live Crew released their second album, Move Somethin' It was also certified Gold and featured the singles "Move Somethin'" and "Do Wah Diddy Diddy". Reached #68 on the Billboard 200 and #20 on the Top R&B/Hip Hop Albums charts.
2 Live Crew's third album As Nasty As They Wanna Be (1989), became the group's most successful commercial studio album and was certified Platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America. The album's single "Me So Horny" peaked at 26 of the Billboard Top 100 chart.  A clean version of the album, As Clean As They Wanna Be was released concurrently with the explicit version.
In 1990, the United States District Court for the Southern District of Florida ruled  As Nasty As They Wanna Be to be legally obscene, becoming the first album in history to be so declared by a federal court; this ruling was later overturned by the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit. An obscenity trial followed, where all of the defendants, including Wong Won, were eventually acquitted. Later that year, 2 Live Crew released Banned in the U.S.A.. The album included the hits "Do the Bart" peaked at 20 on the Top 100 chart. The eponymous title single referred to the earlier federal court obscenity ruling regarding the group's previous album As Nasty As They Wanna Be. Bruce Springsteen granted the group permission to interpolate his song "Born in the U.S.A." for the single. Banned in the U.S.A. was also the first album to bear the RIAA-standard Parental Advisory warning sticker. Also that year 2 Live Crew's album Live in Concert  peaked at number 46 on the Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums chart.Sports Weekend: As Nasty as They Wanna Be, Pt. 2, featuring the single "Pop That Coochie", which reached 58 on the Hot 100 chart, was released by 2 Live Crew in 1991. The group's sixth album was a sequel of sorts to As Nasty As They Wanna Be, and was also accompanied by a clean version, Sports Weekend: As Clean As They Wanna Be, Pt. 2. It is the last studio album to include all of the members of the group.  Wong Won would become the only member of the group to appear on every subsequent album.


=== 1992–2004: Continued success and solo projects ===
In 1992, Wong Won released his debut solo, The Chinaman.  It is the first American hip hop album to embrace having an Asian heritage. On the Billboard charts, the album peaked at No. 38 and stayed two weeks on the Heatseekers Albums chart. The Chinaman was also on the Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums chart for ten weeks, peaking at No. 56.Deal with This was released in 1993 as a Rock on Crew vs 2 Live Crew album, where Wong Won only teamed up with Hobbs.In 1994, the album Back at Your Ass for the Nine-4 by The New 2 Live Crew was released. On the album, Wong Won was joined by Campbell, and a new rapper named Verb. The album peaked at No. 52 on the Billboard 200 chart and #9 on the Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums chart.In 1995, Wong Won reunited with Ross and Hobbs as the 2 Live Crew, and released the group's album Shake a Lil' Somethin' .The single "Shake a lil' Somethin'", peaked at No. 72 on the Top 100 chart and #11 on the Hot Rap Songs|Hot Rap Singles chart. Two of the album's singles charted: "Do the Damn Thing", which made it to #24 on the Hot Rap Singles chart, and "Be My Private Dancer", which peaked at No. 34.In 1998, only Wong Won and Ross participated to the 2 Live Crew release The Real One. The album's singles "2 Live Party", peaked at No. 52 on the Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart, #9 on the Hot Rap Songs chart, while "The Real One" peaked at No. 60 on the Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs and #9 on the Hot Rap Songs charts.After 2 Live Crew, Wong Won said he started Chinaman Records and brought his own show on the road. With this endeavor he released three solo albums: Still Nasty (2000), Stop Playin (2003), and Freaky Chinese (2004). Rapper Flo Rida, then unknown, with his underground group named GroudHoggz participated to Wong Won's 2004 release.


=== 2006–2017: Reforming 2 Live Crew and final projects ===
During 2006–07 Wong Won and Ross met, discussed their differences, and ultimately decided to relaunch 2 Live Crew. They  made offers to past members to rejoin the group, but were declined. As the 2 Live Crew, Wong Won and Ross toured and released singles.In 2010, Wong Won and 2 Live Crew were honorees at the 2010 7th VH1 Hip-Hop Honors. In August, Wong Won and Ross announced the pending release of an album named, Just Wanna Be Heard.In 2014, Wong Won and Ross released the single "Take It Off". Also, Wong Won and Ross made cameo appearances in the Flo Rida music video "G.D.F.R."  That same year, the duo announced the pending release of a new 2 Live Crew studio album Turn Me On. Also that year, Wong Won and Ross reunited with Campbell for several performances.In 2015, Wong Won published his autobiography My Rise 2 Fame. The book chronicled Wong Won's journey from U.S. Air Force Airman to the Hip hop scene.On January 13, 2017, Wong Won released his final project, a compilation album named Breaking Glass Ceilings Volume 1.


== Health issues and death ==
In 1988, shortly before the release of Move Somethin', Wong Won was involved in a near fatal car accident.  His injuries included damage to his brachial plexus, which resulted in the loss of mobility in his left arm. Wong Won had a stroke in 2009 and 2010.On July 13, 2017, Wong Won died at the Miami VA Hospital. His death was attributed to cirrhosis of the liver.


== Legacy ==
While not the first to rap, Wong Won is noted for being the first Asian rapper to gain some notoriety. When 2 Live Crew started to gain traction, Wong Won said that many fans had no clue that he was Asian until the group's music videos were released. For a while Wong Won was the only noticeable Asian American rapper until others came along.


== Discography ==


=== Solo albums ===


=== Solo EPs/singles ===


=== Compilation albums ===


=== 2 Live Crew studio albums (1986–1998) ===


== Bibliography ==
My Rise 2 Fame. Delaware: Iconic Three Media Group. July 20, 2015. ASIN B010NY9W06.


== References ==


== External links ==
Fresh Kid Ice on Facebook
Fresh Kid Ice at IMDb
Fresh Kid Ice discography at Discogs 
Fresh Kid Ice on iTunes


== Works cited ==
My Rise 2 Fame. Delaware: Iconic Three Media Group. July 20, 2015. ASIN B010NY9W06.Douglas Davis, known professionally as Doug E. Fresh, (born September 17, 1966) is a Barbados-born American rapper, record producer, and beatboxer, also known as the "Human Beat Box". The pioneer of 20th-century American beatboxing, Fresh is able to accurately imitate drum machines and various special effects using only his mouth, lips, gums, throat, tongue and a microphone.
In the early 1980s he formed the Get Fresh Crew with DJs Chill Will and Barry B and later added rapper Slick Rick.  Two of their songs "The Show" and "La Di Da Di" are considered early hip hop classics.  "La Di Da Di", in particular, is one of the most sampled songs in music history.


== Early life ==
Doug E. Fresh was born in Barbados with other family roots in Trinidad and Tobago as well. Fresh's grandfather came to Harlem who raised him alongside his mother. Fresh went to a school with a music program, where he played drums, percussion and the trumpet. The school then cut the budget of the music department and Fresh had to return the trumpet back.Fresh became acquainted with rapping from his brother bringing tapes of Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five and DJ Hollywood into the house. Locally on the neighbourhood block there was a group called D & D Express with one of the members known as Teddy D, Teddy's nephews were making hip hop in the basement of a store playing on a turntable and experimenting with the echo chamber. It was there that Fresh would join in on the mic and start to rap. While in school he would write rhymes for poetry, as he was a big of fan of Langston Hughes, where he also won the local Langston Hughes award. During this time several local groups popped up including Ray Von and Johnny Wa, Harlem World, Celebrity Club, and Randy’s Place, the groups would throw parties in cafeterias of surrounding elementary and high schools in which Fresh would attend the parties. In Fresh's personal crew he had Damon and James who were cousins, as a group they were big fans of The Cold Crush Brothers so they named themselves the Cold Cash Crew. At this time Fresh went by several names including Dougie Doug, Dougie D, Law-D, Dougie Doug the Prince of Love, and Christian D and the Criss Cross Crew. The name Doug E. Fresh came from someone at school doing an art piece of his name on the wall and he told them to list him as Dougie’s Fresh but the person incorrectly spelled it out as "Doug E. Fresh" instead. With his new name he would go to other schools and rap battle.As for beatboxing, walking home after school every day Fresh would pass by the mom and pop record shop owned by Bobby Robinson where records would play outside of the store to passerby's. He would hear records from artists like Grandmaster Flash, Spoonie Gee, Funky 4 + 1, and practice humming along to the bass-lines of the songs. One day outside listening to records, Fresh would try beatboxing in between records to which his friends reacted enthusiastically. Word of Fresh's skills spread further at a party in a park in the Lincoln Projects in East Harlem, where he rapped and beatboxed live.  Another event came soon after where Kurtis Blow, who produced for The Fat Boys, lacked turntables and needed instrumentals to perform over so he recruited Fresh to beatbox.


== Music career ==
Fresh began his recording career as a solo artist; he was among the last artists on Enjoy Records and one of the first on Vintertainment Records (the same New York-based label owned by Vincent Davis that would later make a name for hip-hop artist Joeski Love and bring R&B singer Keith Sweat to ultimate fame). He and a new team of DJs known as the Get Fresh Crew (Barry Bee and Chill Will), along with newcomer MC Ricky D (who would later achieve fame as Slick Rick), came to fledgling New Jersey-based hip-hop label Danya/Reality Records the following year and recorded "The Show", which borrowed the melody of the Inspector Gadget theme by Shuki Levy. They also recorded "La Di Da Di", a tune that was completely voiced by MC Ricky D and backed by Doug E. Fresh's beatboxing for the entire duration of the song. The release of these two songs as a 12" single launched Doug E. Fresh (and Slick Rick) into stardom. Both songs are considered among the greatest early hip-hop classics. "The Show" peaked at #7 on the UK Singles Chart in December 1985.Doug E. Fresh was interviewed in the 1986 cult documentary Big Fun In The Big Town. Slick Rick left the group almost a year after the release of "The Show"/"La Di Da Di" single, reappearing in 1988 as a Def Jam artist and releasing his debut album, The Great Adventures of Slick Rick. Doug E. Fresh and the Get Fresh Crew continued on, now officially signed to Danya/Reality/Fantasy, by releasing Oh, My God! in 1986, which included the hit song "All The Way To Heaven". In 1988, The World's Greatest Entertainer was released, featuring the song "Keep Risin' To The Top", which was named after Keni Burke's then-obscure 1981 hit "Rising To The Top" (which has since become Burke's signature song). Doug E. Fresh's "Keep Risin' To The Top" also samples the main chorus of Heatwave's 1976 classic "Ain't No Half Steppin'," which Big Daddy Kane also sampled that same year for his song of the same name.
In 1992, after a four-year hiatus, Fresh joined MC Hammer's label Bust It Records and issued the album Doin' What I Gotta Do, a commercial failure despite some minor acclaim for the single "Bustin' Out (On Funk)", which sampled Rick James's 1979 single "Bustin' Out".
In 1993, Fresh found a new home at Island Records-affiliated label Gee Street. However, he only released one single containing three songs: "I-ight (Alright)" (the main track), "Bounce" and "Freaks". Although "I-ight" (which originated the now-famous club chant "Heyyyyyy, YO!... I-iiiiight?") was slated to become the first major hit for Doug E. Fresh in five years, it was almost immediately overshadowed by "Freaks", a dancehall tune beatboxed entirely by Doug E. Fresh and vocalized mainly by his protégé, a Brooklyn-born Jamaican teenage newcomer named Vicious. The song received major radio and club play, followed by video play in early 1994. Vicious would soon ink a deal with Sony Music's Epic Records for three years, although he would only release one album, Destination Brooklyn.
In 1995, Slick Rick and Doug E. Fresh reunited for a track on an album titled Play, which received positive reviews; Bret Love wrote, "A welcome flashback to the days when guns, drugs, sex, and violence were not the genre's primary lyrical focus." Also on the Play album was "Freak It Out", which featured Uncle Luke, was produced by platinum producer Frankie Cutlass and appeared on the Don't Be a Menace to South Central While Drinking Your Juice in the Hood soundtrack. Play was certified gold by the RIAA.


=== Post Play (2007–present) ===
On May 23, 2007, he performed variations on "The Show" with finalist Blake Lewis on the sixth-season finale of American Idol, the first ever hip-hop performance on the show.In 2010, Fresh resurfaced when rap group Cali Swag District brought back some of his trademark dance moves for their song "Teach Me How to Dougie." Members of Cali Swag District saw Texas college students doing a local dance created in Dallas called the "D-Town Boogie".  They recognized it as a modified version of Fresh's dance moves and created a song that would feature the dance and would also give Fresh his due credit.
On June 27, 2010,  Fresh performed with Cali Swag District on "Teach Me How to Dougie" at the BET Awards pre-show. He also performed a concert called "The Show" at the Paradise Theater on August 12, 2010. On November 8, 2010, Fresh appeared at the Soul Train Awards, where he taught CNN anchor Wolf Blitzer how to Dougie on stage as part of the show. On December 10, 2010, Fresh appeared on ESPN First Take to speak about the phenomenon of the Dougie as a sports celebration and voted on the best sports-related Dougie dances, selecting that of host Skip Bayless, though he rated Wolf Blitzer's Dougie at the Soul Train Awards as better but with no sports association.
On October 28, 2011, Fresh performed at the Paradise Theater in a concert to benefit New York City's public hospitals; the show was part of "STAT! for NYC's Public Hospitals" to raise funds to reduce gun violence. On July 9, 2012, Fresh served as a celebrity judge on the Apollo Live TV show. Beginning May 25, 2013, Fresh hosted a classic hip-hop and R&B show called "The Show" on New York's 107.5 WBLS, which aired 9:00-11:00 p.m. Saturday nights until the final broadcast on December 31, 2016.
Fresh served as a guest mentor to Jeff Dye and Joe Jonas, and performed with them, on the show I Can Do That on June 30, 2015.
Fresh was awarded the Lifetime Achievement Award  at 2019 American Beatbox Championships for his achievements in the music industry, as well as his role as a leading figure in the world of beatboxing. Prior to receiving the award, Fresh presented the Lifetime Achievement Award to Rahzel in 2017.
On September 24, 2021, he released his first full-length album since 1995, titled This One's for Chuck Brown: Doug E. Fresh Salutes The Godfather of Go-Go.
He cameoed in the 2023 film World's Best.


== Personal life ==
Fresh is a member of the Church of Scientology. He performed for a large audience at the Scientology Celebrity Center's Anniversary Gala in 2004. He also performed two tracks on the Scientology music album The Joy of Creating (other artists appearing included Isaac Hayes, Chick Corea, Edgar Winter and Carl Anderson).In April 2007, a storefront for Doug E.'s Chicken and Waffles appeared at the corner of 132nd Street and Adam Clayton Powell Boulevard in Harlem. Work continued on the location for over three years until the eatery finally opened its doors in November 2010. The inspiration to open came from Sylvia's The location  closed permanently in 2015. In 2013, he had plans of opening a second restaurant. Fresh has stated he has a club called Fresh.In 2008 Fresh dealt with foreclosure with $3.5 million in unpaid mortgages on 3 homes, several thousands in credit card debt, and a tax lien issued from the IRS.Fresh has a foundation called Hip Hop Public Health and has been the spokesperson for the Hip Hop Public Health Education Center at Harlem Hospital Center.Fresh has six sons and manages Square Off, the hip-hop group of his sons Dayquan "Slim" Davis and Solomon "Trips" Davis. Square Off released their debut CD entitled Money, Moet & Memories in June 2011. The digital-only release was orchestrated completely by the brothers with little assistance from their father. "When he is involved in something, that's us coming to him...mainly everything we do is our concepts, our own direction," Slim said to the New York Daily News.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===
Oh, My God! (1986)
The World's Greatest Entertainer (1988)
Doin' What I Gotta Do (1992)
Play (1995)


== References ==


== External links ==

Doug E. Fresh at AllMusic
Doug E. Fresh at IMDbAston George Taylor Jr. (born August 5, 1968), professionally known as Funkmaster Flex, is an American DJ, rapper, record producer, and host on New York City's Hot 97 radio station. In 1992, he became host of the first hip hop radio show on Hot 97 in New York, which was a pop radio station at the time.


== Early life ==
Aston Taylor Jr. was born in the Bronx borough of New York City to Jamaican immigrant parents. His father, DJ Aston George Taylor Sr., was a sound system professional. He was raised in a strict, religious household. At the age of 16, he began DJing at local nightclubs.


== Radio career ==
By the age of 19, he began working with fellow Bronx native Chuck Chillout for WRKS 98.7 Kiss-FM in New York. He later left KISS, and spent a brief period at 107.5 WBLS-FM. In the early 1990s, Flex made club appearances at many of Vito Bruno's operated nightclubs. Bruno later convinced Joel Salkowitz, a regional vice president of Hot 97, to begin airing live broadcasts from clubs where he was performing. When they realized the resurgence of Hip Hop was coming fast from its decline in the eighties, they increased the hours of this urban radio programming. Due to the success of that programming, in the spring of 1992 Funkmaster Flex began mixing and hosting his own show, a specialized rap program on Hot 97. With this, Hot 97 became the first pop station in New York to showcase rap. Flex has been with Hot 97 ever since, and currently airs nationally through syndication during weeknights and weekends. He is well known for his signature "bomb drop" sound effect over records. Flex is also responsible for his early mentorship of his friend and former comrade Angie Martinez.


== Website ==
On August 3, 2010, Flex launched his news website InFlexWeTrust.com. He makes the audio, video and mp3's of artist freestyles from his show "exclusively" available on the site. The site also posts entertainment news, music, cars, models, sports and technology. It joined the Complex media network in September 2012, and has been mentioned in songs, including Fabolous' "So NY."


== Controversy ==
In 2011, Flex was arrested for allegedly pushing his wife Monica Joseph-Taylor and sending her threatening texts. As of 2014, Flex is battling his ex-girlfriend in court over child support for their son.In 2012, Flex had a feud with rival NYC hip-hop radio station Power 105.1 and their radio personalities, including DJ Envy and Charlamagne Tha God.In 2015, a petition was started online to get Funkmaster Flex to step down from hosting his radio program on NYC's Hot 97. Flex promised through a series of social media posts that he would air an exclusive premiere of Meek Mill's answer diss track to rapper Drake's "Charged Up" in the midst of their feud. During the actual broadcast on Monday, July 27, Flex told listeners that he had reference tracks that would "expose" Drake's usage of a ghostwriter. However, after many spins of Fetty Wap's "Trap Queen", Rihanna's "Bitch Better Have My Money", and songs off of Future's DS2, listeners started to become enraged, citing that they felt duped.


== Music production ==
By the mid-1990s, Flex was signed by a major record label, Loud Records, for a series of mixtapes entitled 60 Minutes of Funk. All four were certified gold by the RIAA in the US. In 1995 he formed The Flip Squad along with seven of New York City's most respected disc jockeys, including Biz Markie, "BounceMasta" Doo Wop, Big Kap, DJ Enuff, Mister Cee, Frankie Cutlass, DJ Riz, Cipha Sounds and Mark Ronson. Their self-titled debut LP was released on MCA in late 1998. In 1999, he released The Tunnel with Def Jam, which included songs by artists Dr. Dre, Jay-Z, Eminem, LL Cool J, DJ Myth, Method Man, DMX, Nas and Snoop Dogg. Other acts he has worked with include Yvette Michele, Pras, DJ Kool ,  Foxy Brown and Armand Van Helden.In October 2020, Flex announced plans of an upcoming album. In December, he released the album's lead single, "Lurkin", with King Von, while confirming that the album would feature an array of artists, including Juice Wrld, Kodak Black, Post Malone, Lil Baby, and Pop Smoke, among others. A release date is yet to be announced, however the album will be released through Flex's own label IFWT Films and Records.


== Television ==
Funkmaster Flex first appeared on television in the early nineties on Yo! MTV Raps hosted by Fab 5 Freddy, DJ Myth, Ed Lover, and Doctor Dré. He later did various hip-hop and automobile spots for MTV.
In 2003, Flex debuted his first television series, Ride with Funkmaster Flex on the Spike cable network. The show documented the subculture of cars popular in hip hop culture. Noteworthy moments in the series included a look into Diddy's private jet and a visit to Eminem's studio.Flex later developed a one-off Spike TV show race event – The Funkmaster Flex Super Series Invitational. The race featured 60 late-model stock car drivers at The Waterford Speedbowl in Connecticut. Celebrities like Orange County Choppers, LL Cool J, and Lil' Kim were brought out to watch the event.ESPN noticed Ride with Funkmaster Flex and decided to create a show with Flex focusing on custom cars and interviewing athletes from the NBA, NFL, and Major League Baseball. Guests included Danica Patrick, Terrell Owens, and Jason Giambi. The show was called All Muscle with Funkmaster Flex and began airing early 2007.Later in 2007, a second show called Car Wars with Funkmaster Flex premiered on ESPN. Car Wars asked different car customizers to modify existing vehicles for cash prizes. If featured automotive designers such as Patrick Schiavone, former Ford North American Truck & SUV Design Director and currently Vice President of Design at Whirlpool, Ford Explorer Exterior Design Manager Melvin Betancourt and Louis D'erasmo of Valanca Auto Concepts.For Fast Machines with Funkmaster Flex, Flex returned to Spike TV to focus on making muscle and modern car customization for celebrities. Examples included a 1955 Chevy Bel Air for Dale Earnhardt Jr., a 1966 Pontiac GTO for Pontiac Enthusiast Magazine and a 1970 Chevy Chevelle for the U.S. Marines. It also featured an interview with Royal Purple race driver Kathryn Minter.In 2010, Flex returned to MTV with a new show – Funk Flex Full Throttle. The show featured Flex interviewing hip-hop artists and customizing cars; either on location at Spring Break, the New York Auto Show or in his garage. Full Throttle also integrated reality elements as Flex directed his team of car customizers at various builds and allowed viewers inside the lifestyle of Hip-Hop stars.In 2014, Funkmaster Flex appeared on VH1 as part of the reality show This Is Hot 97.


== Car Show Tour ==
Taylor developed and promotes an annual eight-city Funkmaster Flex Custom Car & Bike Show Tour. It has had featured artists such as Drake, Nicki Minaj and Fabolous. Each stop showcases customized cars in competition for cash prizes and model and recording talent search. In 2010, he added the Funkmaster Flex Lifestyle Expo which included sneaker and DJ battles, video game competitions, skateboard demos.He also displays some of his personal collection of roughly 40 muscle cars at each stop of the tour.


== Auto design ==
In 2005, Ford Motor Company opened its Dearborn design studio doors to Taylor to look at how to customize its product line-up and add exposure to the brand. He has since customized several models for Ford.


== Video games ==
He is a voice actor in Quest for the Code in 2002.FunkMaster Flex's name was used on the American release for the PS2 video game Music 3000, FunkMaster Flex's Digital Hitz Factory in 2004.
Flex is a featured DJ on The Beat 102.7 in Grand Theft Auto IV, Grand Theft Auto IV: The Lost and Damned and The Ballad of Gay Tony.He is a celebrity adversary and an unlockable free agent fullback in season mode of ESPN NFL 2K5. He also has an unlockable team, the Baurtwell Funkmasters.Flex was an unlockable character and in-game narrator in Def Jam Vendetta.
Flex is also mentioned in the prelude of NBA 2K18 when talking to ATM (cpu character).


== Discography ==

The Mix Tape, Vol. 1 (1995)
The Mix Tape, Vol. II (1997)
The Mix Tape, Vol. III (1998)
The Tunnel (1999)
The Mix Tape, Vol. IV (2000)
Car Show Tour (2005)
Who You Mad At? Me Or Yourself? (2013)


== References ==Tyrone Gregory Fyffe (born June 4, 1971), also known as Sugarless, is an American record producer from Queens, New York City. During his career he produced tracks for MC Lyte, Foxy Brown, Slick Rick, Ja Rule, Canibus, Jayo Felony, Queen Pen, Cam'ron, 54th Platoon and Royce da 5'9", remixed songs for LL Cool J, The Party, Royal Flush, Robin Thicke and Nas, and collaborated with Teddy Riley, Erick Sermon, Irv Gotti and Dr. Dre.
Fyffe met Teddy Riley through fellow music engineer Franklin Grant. In 1992, Fyffe joined Riley, Grant, David Wynn and Wreckx-n-Effect on the production duties of Hard or Smooth, which spawned the hit song "Rump Shaker". In January 1993, the single received 2× Platinum certification by the RIAA and the album went Platinum. Fyffe continued to work in a team with Riley and Grant, and from 1993 to 1994 he contributed on Father MC, MC Lyte, Shinehead, Ed Lover and Doctor Dré projects.
In 1995, he eventually began credited as 'Sugarless' during his collaborations with Erick Sermon. By the end of the 1990s, his portfolio includes works with Sermon, LL Cool J, Redman, Craig Mack, McGruff, Foxy Brown, Slick Rick, Big Pun and Murder Inc. among others. He produced A+'s "Enjoy Yourself" to international success, and provided additional production to Method Man's "Judgement Day". After working on Murder Inc.'s "Murdergram" song from Streets Is Watching Soundtrack, he began to collaborate with Irv Gotti and became a recurring producer for Ja Rule albums and fellow Roc-A-Fella acts, such as Jay-Z, Amil, Cam'ron and Beanie Sigel.
Since 2001, Fyffe has begun collaborating with hip hop artists across the United States, since up to 2000, his entire clientele consisted of East Coast hip hop musicians. Thus, he had a hand in the West Coast hip hop artists such as Jayo Felony's 2001 Crip Hop and Xzibit's 2002 Man vs. Machine, Midwest hip hop acts such as Royce da 5'9"'s 2002 Rock City and 2004 Death Is Certain, Bone Thugs-n-Harmony's 2007 Strength & Loyalty and Twista's 2017 Crook County, and Southern hip hop groups such as UGK's 2002 Side Hustles and 54th Platoon's 2003 All or Nothin'. After the success of "Straight to the Bank", which was co-produced with Dr. Dre, Fyffe became a recurring producer for several G-Unit projects, such as 2008 T·O·S (Terminate on Sight), 50 Cent's 2009 Before I Self Destruct and 2014 Animal Ambition albums and Tony Yayo's 2011 El Chapo mixtape. In 2010, Fyffe released a mixtape, The Pyrex, hosted by DJ Superstar Jay.From 2010 to 2020, he produced tracks for Ghostface Killah ("Smooth Sailing", which appeared on Wu-Tang Killa Bees' Pollen: The Swarm Part Three, and its remix version was included in Wu-Massacre), Redman's 2010 Reggie, Styles P's 2011 Master of Ceremonies, Lazee's 2011 mixtape One Way Ticket, Prodigy's 2012 H.N.I.C. 3, Jadakiss's 2015 Top 5 Dead or Alive, and Erick Sermon's 2019 Vernia.
Alongside fellow American producers Swede of 808 Mafia, Mars of 1500 or Nothin', Rockwilder, Scoop DeVille and Tony Dofat, and Parisian producers Nicko of Soulchildren, Oliver of Drum Dreamers, Cedric Pistol, Nick D. Green and Tarik Azzouz, and Amsterdamer producer Shroom, Fyffe was one of twelve juries of the 3rd annual Beat Battle Music Producer Challenge, which took place at Gnarly Music in London in 2019.He has his own studio, The Music Factory, in West Hempstead, New York.


== Discography ==
2010: The Pyrex (hosted by DJ Superstar Jay)


== Production discography ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Ty Fyffe at AllMusic
Ty Fyffe discography at Discogs
Ty Fyffe discography at MusicBrainz
Ty Fyffe's channel on YouTubeRobert Mandell, professionally known as G Koop, is an American Grammy-nominated record producer, songwriter and musician.


== Early life ==
G Koop is originally from Boston, Massachusetts. His father had a large collection of albums, and his mother contends that G Koop's first word was "doobie," interpreted as a request for The Doobie Brothers to be played. His first job was at a record store. As a young child, he learned to play a number of instruments, including guitar, bass, piano, and drums.G Koop graduated from Berklee College of Music. While there, he studied music theory and performance. G Koop plays some of these instruments in his own studio while making his samples. Also while at Berklee, G Koop met Graham Richards and Anthony Caruso. The three have had an ongoing collaboration dubbed "G Koop and O-Man" since then.


== Career ==
G Koop moved to California in 2002 and formed a jazz band, "The People's Quintet," with drummer Donald "Duck" Bailey. Unable to find work for the group, G Koop instead began working with music production software, such as Pro Tools and Reason.He has been called a specialist in "replaying samples", in which an original sample is reinterpreted and recreated in the studio. The resulting track is a new interpretation that is no longer under the original's copyright, but it still retains the original's character. Producers can use the new work in their own songs without having to pay the fees required to sample the original track.G Koop first produced for the Bay Area hip-hop group Foreign Legion. The group's MC, Prozack Turner, introduced him to producer Jake One, who in turn employed G Koop as a piano teacher. The two worked together on Jake's 2008 album, White Van Music, with G Koop performing instruments. He also worked on Jake's 2009 collaboration with Freeway, The Stimulus Package. The two also partnered together on Drake's "Furthest Thing" for his 2013 Nothing was the Same album. Jake One found the original sample for "Furthest Thing" from a 1990s live gospel album that Gene Brown, a record collector, recommended to him. However, the rights owners to the song requested high fees. Instead, Jake One asked G Koop to make an interpolation of the sample to avoid publishing issues. G Koop played all the instruments—guitar, piano, organ, drums, and bass—in his studio. The album's main producer, Noah "40" Shebib, recorded the vocals for the track with a choir in Toronto.G Koop's first major placement as producer was Nelly's "Self Esteem" featuring Chuck D, which was on Nelly's 2008 gold album Brass Knuckles. He has worked with a number of artists, including Atmosphere, DOOM, Funkadelic, The Game, G Unit, Ice Cube, Pusha T, Rhymesayers, and Rihanna, among others. G Koop also wrote, produced, and played a number of songs with George Clinton on Funkadelic's 2014 First Ya Gotta Shake the Gate. The album, the first for the band in 33 years, provided 33 tracks with a number of artists, including Sly Stone, Soul Clap, and Bootsy Collins. The second single on the album, "Ain’t that Funkin’ Kinda Hard on You," was written and produced by G Koop and George Clinton. Hip Hop producer Ill Tal, in his review, called it "one of the best songs on the album and the name of George’s new auto-biography. The song is smooth, mellow, and funky with George doing most of the vocal leads." Nick DeRiso, in his review of the album for Something Else Reviews, called "Ain’t that Funkin’ Kinda Hard on You" the "perfect reintroduction of George Clinton … since it begins with a darkly ingratiating embrace rather that the expected turn-this-mother-out groove."  DeRiso goes on to call the track the "standout moment from Funkadelic’s sprawling new comeback effort." Other G Koop songs were singled out in reviews as well. Ill Tal wrote of "You Can’t Unring the Bell," that it is "probably my favorite hip-hop influenced song on the album." Ill Tal went on to refer to G Koop (although not by name): "Whoever made the beat did a great job sampling a break beat for the drums and what sounds like an old horn riff from George’s vaults." G Koop's bass playing was also recognized in E.E. Bradman's review for Bass Player, who commended G Koop's bass playing on a number of tracks.With Metro Boomin, G Koop co-produced the song "Bad and Boujee" by Migos, featuring Lil Uzi Vert—his first no. 1 hit. The song was released in October 2016, and it rose to no. 1 on the Billboard Hot 100 in January 2017. The song has gone platinum in the United States. The album the song appeared on, Migos' Culture, debuted at no. 1 on the Billboard 200. The sample pack used on the song was originally sent to Metro Boomin, and was used to make not only Bad and Boujee, but also 21 Savage's "Ocean Drive."G Koop worked with producer Southside of 808 Mafia on DJ Khaled's 2016 "I Got the Keys," featuring Jay Z and Future. I Got the Keys has gone platinum, and rose to no. 30 on the Billboard Hot 100. The song is on the album Major Key, produced by Southside and co-produced by G Koop and Jake One as co-producers. The album was released at no. 1 on the Billboard 200, and was nominated for a Grammy for Best Rap Album.Since then, he has worked with Ant, one of two members of Atmosphere, on Atmosphere's albums Fishing Blues and Southsiders, and in a collaboration with Brother Ali on the latter's album, "All the Beauty in this Whole Life."G Koop's studio, "Fuzz Deluxxe," is based in Oakland. He also runs the website "Sample Replay Society," which works as a catalog for his work. He collects old instruments, such as the Clavinet and Fender Rhodes, and has several Fender guitars. He is a client of Pulse Recording.


== Selected discography ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
G Koop at AllMusic
G Koop discography at DiscogsHeather B. Gardner (born November 13, 1970), billed professionally as Heather B., is an American rapper, reality television personality, and radio host who first gained fame as a member of the hip hop group Boogie Down Productions before becoming a cast member on The Real World: New York, the 1992 inaugural season of MTV's reality show The Real World.


== Career ==
From February 16 to May 18, 1992, Gardner filmed The Real World: New York, the first season of MTV's reality television series, The Real World, on which she appeared as a cast member. The series premiered May 21 that year. On the show, she was depicted as a hip-hop artist with the group Boogie Down Productions, on the verge of getting her big career break. During the season, she is seen recording her first album. According to MTV's biography for her: "She has a lot of drive and dedication to whatever she is doing. She makes friends quickly and always speaks her mind regardless of the consequences."Gardner was affiliated with the rap group Boogie Down Productions, and was signed to Pendulum Records in 1995. In 1996, she released her first album, Takin' Mine. The single "All Glocks Down", an anti-gun violence anthem, received radio play, as did the follow-up single "If Headz Only Knew."Gardner scored a minor role in the 1995 film Dead Presidents as "Peaches". In 1997, Gardner signed with MCA Records and in 1998 she released the single, "Do You," which had a considerable amount of television and radio airplay. In 2002 Gardner produced her second album, Eternal Affairs, with production from Pete Rock and DJ Premier. The album met with positive reviews despite not charting on Billboard.Outside of her music career, Gardner has appeared in various projects and television specials related to The Real World. She also appeared in the film The Wedding Video directed by Real World alum Norman Korpi, and a 2005 television commercial for America Online anti-virus software. Gardner's third studio album, Open Bar, which was executive-produced by DJ Premier.As of 2012, Gardner is the co-host of the Sirius Satellite Radio show Sway in the Morning with former MTV reporter Sway Calloway. In 2016 the duo appeared in the twelfth episode, "Soliloquy of Chaos,"  of Luke Cage, interviewing Method Man, about being rescued by Cage during a hold-up of a Harlem bodega.She appeared as herself in the 2018 Bruce Willis film Death Wish.
In 2021, she portrayed the character Aunt Ruth in the Jussie Smollett movie B-Boy Blues, Smollett's adaptation of the novel series written by James Earl Hardy.


== Personal life ==
Gardner married fellow hiphop artist born E. Gray, a former member of the group Bravehearts who goes by the professional name Horse. In a 2010  interview with The Urban Daily Gardner related that she met Gray on a subway train 15 years prior, and that they had been married for nine years, commenting, "It's like everybody else's house and we're a real family. We got a dog and pain-in-the-ass neighbors. He did music and I do music."


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===
Takin' Mine (1996)
Eternal Affairs (2002)


=== Singles ===
"I Get Wreck"
"All Glocks Down"
"If Headz Only Knew"
"My Kinda Nigga"
"Live M.C."
"The Game Don't Stop"
"Guilty"
"Steady Rockin'"


== See also ==
List of female rappers


== References ==


== External links ==

Heather B. Gardner discography at Discogs
Heather B. Gardner at IMDb
The Real World with Heather B on Thermal Soundwaves Show
AbduSalaam, Ismael (March 12, 2010). "Heather B. Returns With DJ Premier For 'Open Bar'". All Hip Hop.Michael Craig McDermon (born September 14, 1973, in Queens, New York), better known by his stage name  Mic Geronimo, is an American rapper who was acquainted with Irv Gotti of Murder Inc. Gotti and his brother met Mic Geronimo at a Queens high school talent show, and Mic agreed to record a single ("Shit's Real"), which became a classic underground hit. Mic Geronimo landed a deal with Blunt/TVT Records and debuted with the 1995 LP The Natural. His song "Wherever You Are" was sampled by Moby for the track "Jam for the Ladies" in 2002.The 1997 album Vendetta saw him with a higher profile, working with Jay-Z, Ja Rule, DMX, the LOX and Puff Daddy on the single "Nothin' Move but the Money", the video for which featured porn star Heather Hunter. The video was supposed to be shot by director Hype Williams, but Hype was filming an Usher video, so instead this became the first video directed by Christopher Erskin, who later directed the 2004 film Johnson Family Vacation.
In 2003, Mic Geronimo released Long Road Back, followed by Alive 9/14/73 in 2007.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===


=== Singles ===


== References ==Dennis David Coles (born May 9, 1970), better known by his stage name Ghostface Killah, is an American rapper and a member of the hip hop group Wu-Tang Clan. After the group achieved breakthrough success in the aftermath of Enter the Wu-Tang (36 Chambers), the members went on to pursue solo careers to varying levels of success. Ghostface Killah debuted his solo career with Ironman, which was well-received by music critics, in 1996. He has enjoyed continued success in the years that have followed, releasing critically acclaimed albums such as Supreme Clientele (2000) and Fishscale (2006). His stage name was taken from one of the characters in the 1979 kung fu film The Mystery of Chess Boxing. He is the founder of his own record label, Starks Enterprises.
Ghostface Killah is critically acclaimed for his loud, fast-paced flow, and his emotional stream-of-consciousness narratives containing cryptic slang and non-sequiturs. In 2006, MTV included him as an "honourable mention" on their list of the "Greatest MCs of All Time", while the editors of About.com placed him on their list of the "Top 50 MCs of Our Time (1987–2007)", calling him "one of the most imaginative storytellers of our time." Q magazine called him "rap's finest storyteller." Pitchfork Media has stated that "Ghostface has unparalleled storytelling instincts; he might be the best, most colorful storyteller rap has ever seen." NPR has called him "a compulsive storyteller", and asserts that "his fiction is painterly."


== Early life ==
Ghostface grew up in the Stapleton Houses housing project in Staten Island, New York City, helping with daily care of two younger brothers who had muscular dystrophy. The 2019 series Wu-Tang: An American Saga depicts a feud between him and fellow Clan member Raekwon; however the feud was purely fictional and never took place in reality. Raekwon and Ghostface attended junior high school together.


== Career ==


=== Early work ===
A roommate of Wu-Tang founder RZA, Ghostface helped bring together the other seven members. In 1995, Ghostface guest-starred extensively on fellow Clan member Raekwon's debut album, Only Built 4 Cuban Linx..., appearing on almost every song and receiving nearly equal billing. "It felt good to have my boy next to me, Ghostface, who basically comes from the same lifestyle as I come from. And we were able to sit down and concoct an idea that we both were able to respect and basically get everybody in the crew involved...", said Raekwon about Ghostface's involvement in the project. Raekwon intended Only Built 4 Cuban Linx... to play like a film, with himself as the "star," Ghostface Killah as the "guest star" and producer RZA as the "director." He also contributed songs to the Sunset Park and Don't Be a Menace to South Central While Drinking Your Juice in the Hood soundtracks; both songs were included on his first solo LP, Ironman, in 1996. The album, which debuted at #2 on the Billboard 200, had a more pronounced soul influence (particularly 1970s soul) than previous Wu-Tang releases, and Ghostface's future albums would continue to feature this stylistic trait.In the year 2000, Ghostface released his second studio album, Supreme Clientele. The album was well received by critics, and peaked at #7 on the Billboard 200|Billboard 200. It included "Apollo Kids", a popular single which featured Raekwon and had a sample of "Cool Breeze" by Solomon Burke. "Cherchez La Ghost", another single off the album, became a minor club hit. Supreme Clientele marked a turning point in terms of RZA's influence on Ghostface's sound, as only six songs on it are produced by RZA, whereas on Ironman, its predecessor, every song but one is produced by RZA. Although he contributed fewer beats to the project than to Ironman, RZA personally oversaw the mixing and production of the album as a whole, thereby contributing to Supreme Clientele's unified sound.Ghostface wasted little time in recording his next album, the heavily R&B-influenced Bulletproof Wallets, released a year after Supreme Clientele. Its main single, "Never Be the Same Again", featured Raekwon and Carl Thomas. It produced another minor club hit, "Flowers", which featured guest vocals from fellow Wu-Tang members Method Man and Raekwon, and a popular single, "Ghost Showers" which featured Madame Majestic, whose other key claim to fame is that she sings on the popular Wu-Tang track "Gravel Pit".


=== Def Jam ===
In 2003, Ghostface signed with Def Jam Records. After temporarily dropping "Killah" from his stage name, Ghostface released The Pretty Toney Album in April 2004. The album, while containing two RZA productions, featured none of the Clan; instead, it featured collaborations with Missy Elliott, D-Block, and Jacki-O. The singles "Tush" and "Run", which were collaborations with Missy and Jadakiss respectively, achieved moderate success in the clubs and on the charts, and the album was featured on numerous "best of the year" lists; for instance, it was Pitchfork Media's #9 album of the year. Ghostface also appeared on the track "On My Knees" by UK R&B group the 411; the song became a hit in the UK and Australia. Ghostface then released an album entitled 718 (after the Staten Island area code) with a group of his protégés, the Theodore Unit. Ghostface also appeared on "He Comes" by De La Soul, on The Grind Date. In November 2005, Ghostface and Theodore Unit's breakout star Trife Da God released a joint project, Put It on the Line.

In 2006, Ghostface teamed up with underground artist MF Doom for a still-unreleased album entitled Swift & Changeable. MF Doom also produced several songs for Ghostface's 2006 album Fishscale, on which he chose to revert to the stage name "Ghostface Killah", rather than just "Ghostface". The album debuted strongly, appearing at the #4 position on the U.S. Billboard 200 and at #2 on the R&B charts, the rapper's most auspicious chart showing since the heyday of the Wu-Tang Clan and the release of his solo debut. The album also received near-unanimous positive reviews. Ghostface embarked on a limited-date tour of U.S. venues in support of the album, performing several of his concerts together with most of the other members of the Wu-Tang Clan.
In 2007, Ghostface provided the theme song for the Irish animated series Skunk Fu! that ran on Kids' WB. On December 4, 2007, Ghostface released his seventh solo studio album, The Big Doe Rehab.
In a May 2008 interview, Ghostface Killah stated that he would make an R&B-inspired album in the vein of certain tracks he had done before with artists such as Ne-Yo and Jodeci. That album would become his eighth studio album, Ghostdini: Wizard of Poetry in Emerald City, which won good reviews from music critics. It featured singles such as "Baby" and "Do Over". In March 2009, Ghostface responded to the Rihanna/Chris Brown controversy by recording a song, "Message from Ghostface", which was dedicated to women in abusive relationships.
In a May 2009 interview with Rolling Stone, Raekwon indicated that Ghostface Killah was preparing to release a new album. In response to a question asking if the Wu-Tang Clan were going to release a follow-up to 8 Diagrams, Raekwon stated, "Everybody's doing different things right now — you got Meth [Method Man] coming out with an album, you got Ghostface coming out with an album, some guys working on their projects, some guys getting into the film world, everybody is multi-tasking right now." Ghostface appeared on a total of 8 songs on Raekwon's highly anticipated release of Only Built 4 Cuban Linx... Pt. II.
Shortly after the release of Only Built 4 Cuban Linx... Pt. II, Def Jam contracted Raekwon to work with their label artists Method Man and Ghostface Killah on an album which later received the title Wu-Massacre. Production began in November 2009. Wu-Massacre was released March 30, 2010 to generally positive reviews from music critics; this time, however, reviews were more mixed, with some critics objecting to the 30-minute-long album's rushed feel. With heavy promotion, it sold 37,900 units in its first week; it has sold 64,000 units as of May 12, 2010. It features production from Scram Jones, Mathematics, and The RZA, who produced the album's lead single, "Our Dreams". 
In 2010, Ghostface confirmed that he would be releasing two new studio albums, Apollo Kids and one which would serve as a sequel to his 2000 album Supreme Clientele. In 2011, Ghostface Killah featured on UK artist Josh Osho's debut single "Redemption Days".


=== Post Def Jam ===
Ghostface released a collaborative album with D-Block member Sheek Louch called Wu Block. The album was released on November 27, 2012, on E1 Music and debuted at number 73 on the US Billboard 200 chart, with first-week sales of 8,600 copies in the United States. It fell to #152 in its second week selling 4,200 more copies. In January of 2017, Ghostface and Sheek Louch announced on their respective social media accounts that a second collaborative album was in the works.In an interview with Complex Magazine on November 17, 2012, Ghostface confirmed that he had left Def Jam, making Apollo Kids his last album on the label. In the same interview, he also stated that Blue & Cream, the sequel to his critically acclaimed album Supreme Clientele, was 80-85 percent done. On April 16, 2013, Ghostface released his tenth album Twelve Reasons to Die which was produced by Adrian Younge and executive produced by RZA. The album was released in various formats such as CD, vinyl and cassette under RZA's Soul Temple Records. The deluxe digital and CD versions also came with a comic book.He would later announce that the sequel to Supreme Clientele would be released between July and September 2013 and that his collaborative album with MF Doom would be released around Halloween 2013 though neither projects materialized. In January 2014, he appeared on the VH1 series Couples Therapy with his girlfriend Kelsey Nykole. Later that year Ghostface announced he would be releasing his eleventh album titled 36 Seasons in December 2014. He collaborated with Canadian jazz band BADBADNOTGOOD on an album titled Sour Soul, which was released in 2015 which earned a nomination for the 2015 Polaris Music Prize.
A sequel to Twelve Reasons to Die, simply titled Twelve Reasons to Die II, was released on July 10, 2015.Ghostface had a string of UK and European tour dates scheduled in 2016.
In 2022 he provided vocals on the song "Purple Hearts" from Kendrick Lamar's album Mr. Morale & The Big Steppers.


== Lawsuits ==
In July 2011, Coles was sued by Jack Urbont for copyright violation stemming from the "improper use" of the 1960s "Iron Man" theme song, which Urbont claimed as his own. Urbont also took issue with Coles' appropriation of the Iron Man brand name. Coles was granted summary judgment on the lawsuit in April 2015, which stated that Marvel Entertainment, owners of the Iron Man character and brand, owned the "Iron Man" theme song, not Urbont.In August 2011, Coles filed a lawsuit against Universal Music for unpaid royalties.


== Personal life ==
Like fellow Wu-Tang Clan member Raekwon, Ghostface is a Muslim, having converted to Islam in 2004. Ghostface is the father of rappers Sun God, Supreme, and singer Infinite.


== Aliases ==

Ghostface Killah, like most members of the Wu-Tang clan, rapped under several personae, each with their own name, mythology and influences. Some recurring aliases:

Ghostface Killah (occasionally spelled Ghostface Killer, Ghost Face Killer, Ghost Face Killah, or abbreviated GFK)
Ghostface (shortened stage name during The Pretty Toney Album era)
Ghost Deini
Ironman, Tony Starks, or just StarksGhostface has frequently assumed the names of both Ironman and Tony Starks [sic], a reference to the Marvel Comics character Iron Man and his true identity, billionaire industrialist Tony Stark. He released a 1996 album titled Ironman. His song, "Slept On Tony With Dirt," appears in the 2008 film Iron Man, and he also appears in a deleted scene on the DVD.Starky Love
Pretty Toney, P Tone


== Discography ==


== Filmography ==


=== Movie appearances ===
Belly (1998) cameo appearance
Black and White (1999) as himself
Hunter Dawson (2002) as himself
Big Wigs (2002) as himself
Fade to Black  (2004) as himself
Walk Hard: The Dewey Cox Story (2007) as himself
Iron Man (2008) as himself; also appearing in a music video aired on Tony Stark's private jet. (Cut in post-production, his cameo can be found in the DVD's deleted scenes section.)
Big Pun: The Legacy (2008) as himself
Up and Above (2008) as himself
When in Rome (2010) as Guggenheim DJ
Purple Tape Documentary (2016) as himself
You're Watching Video Music Box (2021) as himself
“The A-Team, episode 22” (1986) as himself


=== TV series appearances ===
The World According To Pretty Toney (2005 - 2007) as himself
30 Rock (2006) as himself (episodes "Jack-Tor" and "The Source Awards")
Human Giant (2007) as himself (episodes "Mind Explosion" and "Mosh Pit!")
The Boondocks (2007) as himself (episode "Stinkmeaner Strikes Back")
Rushing Jason (2008) as Big Poppa
Mob Wives (VH1 Series) (2011) as himself
Couples Therapy (2014) as himself
Luke Cage (2018) as himself (episode "All Souled Out")


=== Video game appearances ===
Wu-Tang: Shaolin Style (1999) as himself
Def Jam Vendetta (2003) as himself
Def Jam: Fight for NY (2004) as himself
Def Jam Fight for NY: The Takeover (2006) as himself
WWE Smackdown VS. Raw 2007 (2006) Coles had his song “The Champ” on the soundtrack
Def Jam: Icon (2007) as himself
Grand Theft Auto: Chinatown Wars (2009), created the theme music


== References ==


== External links ==
Ghostface Killah at IMDbGodfather Don is an American rapper and record producer from New York City.  He has been "a creative force within New York City's underground hip-hop scene" since he made his debut in 1991.


== Biography ==
Godfather Don first appeared in 1991 with Hazardous, released by Select Records. The album established the Godfather as an MC influenced by the blatant, hard-hitting style of Chuck D. A few years later, the Don appeared on and produced the Ultramagnetic MC's' The Four Horsemen, which led to a collaboration with that group's standout, Kool Keith. The Don and Keith released their EP Cenobites in 1995 through Fondle 'Em Records, which was started by New York b-boy, DJ, and man about town Bobbito Garcia. The material on the EP had originally been recorded as gags or promos for Garcia's underground hip-hop radio show on New York's WKCR. The Cenobites EP was then reissued by Fondle 'Em as a full-length LP. Throughout the 1990s, Godfather Don continued to work as a producer, working on tracks from Kool Keith, Hostyle, and Ayatollah, among others. In 1999, he released his second album, Diabolique, on which his flow was very similar to the bludgeoning raps of his 1991 debut. The album included cameo appearances from Kool Keith and Sir Menelik, and appeared on the Hydra Entertainment imprint, for which Godfather Don continued to record, releasing several 12" singles and  Instrumental hip hop albums.
In the 2000s, Don was known for his work with Screwball, a Queensbridge hip hop group, producing much of their 3 albums.
In 2007, Don resurfaced with 'The Slave Of New York E.P.': an EP of previously unreleased archive material in association with hip-hop website Diggers With Gratitude who tracked him down and worked on putting this project out. 150 copies of this six track vinyl E.P. were released, with the first 45 copies having signed sleeves. The material used was recorded before and during his time with Hydra, with the title track coming directly from a cassette that Don had given to Bobbito to play on WKCR. Due to the resurge in interest, Don was then asked to release a CD compilation of material by another label, titled The Nineties Sessions, out now.
On May 21, 2011, Don dropped another EP of previously unreleased material titled "The Reformation Circa. 1999" a collaborative effort between Mic-el The Don, (who featured on tracks from the "Diabolique" album) and Godfather Don. The EP was recorded sometime in the late 1990s, it is one of Godfather Don's last full bodies of work in the hip-hop genre before he moved on to a career in Jazz music with the group The Open Mind. On March 27, 2020, Don dropped a new album of previously unreleased material titled "Osmosis" in collaboration with French beatmaker Parental.


== Discography ==
1991: Hazardous
1995: Cenobites (EP & LP)
1997: Hydra Beats Vol. 3-7-11-14
1998: Diabolique
2004: Hydra Beats The Next Level Vol. 1
2007: The Slave Of New York EP (Limited Edition)
2007: The Nineties Sessions
2009: The Ill Funk Freaker EP (Limited Edition)
2010: Donnie Brasco (Previously Unreleased Third Official Studio Album)
2010: Properties of Steel (Single Collection)
2011: The Reformation Circa. 1999
2018: Jazz Spastiks Remixes
2020: Osmosis;  Beats, Bangers & Biscuits at 535 E 55th St


== References ==


== External links ==
On The Go magazine Interview (1997)
Allmusic
Dox: BEAT DIGGIN´
The House ListIrving Domingo Lorenzo Jr. (born June 26, 1970), professionally known as Irv Gotti (or DJ Irv), is an American DJ, music producer, record executive, and the CEO and co-founder of Murder Inc. Records. He is best known for producing multiple number-one records for Ashanti, Ja Rule, and Jennifer Lopez, as well as his collaborations with Jay-Z, DMX, and Kanye West. Gotti is also the creator of the BET series Tales.


== Early life ==
Irv Gotti was born in the Hollis neighborhood of the borough of Queens in New York City. 


== Career ==
Irv Gotti, under the moniker DJ Irv, produced the song Can I Live on Jay-Z's June 1996 debut album, Reasonable Doubt. 
In 1997, through Irv Gotti, Def Jam signed Ruff Ryders artist DMX. DMX's first studio album, It's Dark and Hell is Hot was released on May 12, 1998 and was co-executive produced by Irv Gotti. The album debuted and peaked at number 1 on the Billboard Top 200 and sold over 250,000 copies in its first week. The album went on to sell four million copies in America, being certified quadruple platinum by the RIAA, and sold five million copies worldwide.After helping Def Jam with the success of DMX and Jay-Z, Russell Simmons gave Irv Gotti his own label under Def Jam. While watching Biography on A&E during gangster week, a Murder, Inc. logo appeared on the screen and Irv Gotti decided to use the name for his label because Murder, Inc. put out hits for murder and Irv wanted to put out hit records.
Irv Gotti co-produced all of Ja Rule's 1999 debut album, Venni Vetti Vecci, as well as his 2000 second studio album, Rule 3:36. Irv co-produced Rule 3:36's singles Put It On Me and Between Me And You.
In 2002, Irv Gotti released Irv Gotti Presents The Inc, featuring much of Murder Inc.'s roster. Irv co-produced all of the album, including the album's hit single Down 4 U.
Irv, Ja Rule, and the label Murder Inc. were all involved in a well-publicized feud with G-Unit Records, Aftermath Records, and Shady Records over history between 50 Cent and Ja Rule. After this, Murder Inc. would change their name to The Inc. 
Under The Inc. banner, Irv would move the label to Universal Motown and sign Vanessa Carlton. Gotti co-produced Vanessa Carlton's third album, Heroes and Thieves, which was released October 9, 2007, with Channel 7, Rick Rubin and Stephan Jenkins.In an interview with Angie Martinez in early May 2009, Gotti stated that his label, Murder Inc., was leaving Universal Records.
In September 2013, Murder Inc. was relaunched as an umbrella label under Irv Gotti's new label, Visionary.


== Legal issues ==


=== Money Laundering ===
On Friday, January 3, 2003, federal agents and New York Police Department investigators raided the headquarters of Murder Inc. Records, located at One Worldwide Plaza in Midtown Manhattan. The raid was a part of a year-long investigation into the connection between The Lorenzo brothers and American drug lord Kenneth “Supreme” McGriff. Investigators believed that the Lorenzos used drug money supplied by McGriff to launch Murder Inc. as a way to launder the illegal funds. Investigators also believed the brothers helped McGriff launder drug money through the making of the 2003 film Crime Partners. Although computers and documents were seized, no charges were immediately filed, and no arrests were immediately made. The raid was dramatized in the music video for Ja Rule’s Murder Reigns.
Chris and Irv Gotti’s history with McGriff dated back to 1994, when McGriff, newly paroled from prison, met Chris and Irv on the set of a music video in Queens, New York. McGriff wanted to go into cinematography and sought help from Chris and Irv Gotti to produce and direct a film based on Donald Goines’ Kenyatta series’ novel Crime Partners. The Lorenzos since then maintained a friendship with McGriff, having him appear in the music video for Ja Rule’s 1999 single “Murda 4 Life” and helped finance McGriff’s dream project, Crime Partners, around 2000.
On January 25, 2005, Chris and Irv Gotti surrendered to authorities in New York City and were officially charged with money laundering and conspiracy to launder money. During the trial, Irv Gotti was represented by Gerald B. Lefcourt, and Chris Gotti was represented by Gerald Shargel. In December 2005, Chris and Irv Gotti were found not guilty of the charges against them.


== Discography ==


=== Singles produced ===
1994
"Shit's Real" (Mic Geronimo)
1996
"Can I Live" (Jay-Z)
1998
"Can I Get A..." (Jay-Z featuring Amil & Ja Rule)
"Hot Spot" (Foxy Brown)
1999
"What's My Name" (DMX)
"Holla Holla" (Ja Rule)
2000
"Come Back in One Piece"  (Aaliyah & DMX) 
"Between Me and You" (Ja Rule featuring Christina Milian)
2001
"What's Luv?" (Fat Joe featuring Ashanti & Ja Rule)
"I'm Real (Murder Remix)" (Jennifer Lopez featuring Ja Rule)
"Ain't It Funny (Murder Remix)" (Jennifer Lopez featuring Ja Rule & Caddillac Tah)
"I Cry" (Ja Rule)
"Always on Time" (Ja Rule featuring Ashanti)
2002
"Foolish" (Ashanti)
"Happy" (Ashanti)
"Down 4 U" (Irv Gotti featuring Ja Rule, Ashanti, Vita & Charli Baltimore)
"Mesmerize" (Ja Rule featuring Ashanti)
"Gangsta Lovin" (Eve (rapper) featuring Alicia Keys)
2004
"Breakup 2 Makeup" (Ashanti featuring Black Child) 
"Wonderful" (Ja Rule featuring Ashanti and R. Kelly)
2005
"Infatuated" (Memphis Bleek)
2008
"Nice" (The Game) featuring Newz
2018
"Violent Crimes" (Kanye West)
2019
"Brothers" (Kanye West featuring Charlie Wilson)


== References ==


== External links ==
Irv Gotti at IMDbTsidi Ibrahim (born November 26, 1976), known professionally as Jean Grae (formerly What? What?), is an American rapper. She rose in the underground hip hop scene in New York City and has built an international fanbase. Grae's unique music and lyrical style have earned the artist recognition as a favorite emcee by many rap artists such as Talib Kweli, Jay-Z, and Black Thought of the Roots.


== Early life ==
Jean Grae was born Tsidi Ibrahim, in Cape Town, South Africa, on November 26, 1976. The child of South African jazz musicians Sathima Bea Benjamin and Abdullah Ibrahim, Jean was raised in New York City, where the family moved after Jean's birth. Grae studied Vocal Performance at Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School, before studying a Major in Music Business at New York University; dropping out after three weeks of class.


== Career ==


=== 1996–1998: Career beginnings ===
In 1995, Jean was discovered by George Rithm Martinez when he recruited the artist for a five-song demo in his group Ground Zero. The demo earned "Unsigned Hype" honors in The Source in March 1996. Jean later joined a hip hop group called Natural Resource along with rapper Ocean and disc jockey James "AGGIE" Barrett. In 1996, they released two 12-inch singles on their label, Makin' Records. They appeared on singles by Pumpkinhead and Bad Seed, as well as on the O.B.S. (Original Blunted Soldiers) double 12-inch single. They produced much of the material released under pseudonym "Run Run Shaw".


=== 1998–2004: Solo career ===
Natural Resource dissolved in 1998, after which Jean changed her stage name from What? What? to Jean Grae, a reference to the X-Men character Jean Grey. Jean released the LP, Attack of the Attacking Things, on August 6, 2002, and released This Week on September 21, 2004. Jean has recorded with major hip-hop artists such as Atmosphere, The Roots, Phonte, Mr. Len, Pharoahe Monch, The Herbaliser, Masta Ace and Immortal Technique.
Grae recorded an album with North Carolina producer 9th Wonder, entitled Jeanius; the unfinished recording was leaked online, and work stopped. However, at a release party for 9th Wonder's Dream Merchant Volume 2, Jean stated that Jeanius was still going to be released. It was released on June 24, 2008 on Zune Live Marketplace, then on disc on July 8, 2008. Jean's rapping was described by Robert Christgau as "remarkable for its rapidity, clarity and idiomatic cadence. The writing has a good-humored polysyllabic literacy."


=== 2005–2008: Blacksmith Music ===
Previously signed to Babygrande Records, Jean signed a deal in 2005 with Talib Kweli's Blacksmith Records. On April 28, 2008, Grae posted a blog entry on MySpace saying goodbye to fans. Jean was disenchanted with the music industry and desired to start a family, but said that work on new material was ongoing. In July 2008, Talib Kweli posted a blog entry explaining Grae's album, mentioning that Grae was not retiring. He encouraged fans to purchase the album, referring to Grae as "one of the last true MCs left." Grae returned to doing live performances later that year.


=== 2008–present: Freelance ===
On September 18, 2008, Grae posted a Craigslist ad offering creative services for $800/16 bars. On a blog, Jean stated, "I don't wanna complain anymore, I just wanna change some things about the way artists are treated and the way you guys are allowed to be involved, since it IS the digital age." Since then, Jean's music has been self-released through the artist's website and Bandcamp.
On June 25, 2011, Grae released a free mixtape entitled Cookies or Comas, which features guest appearances from Styles P, Talib Kweli and Pharoahe Monch; it also includes "Assassins" from Monch's W.A.R. album and "Uh Oh" From Talib Kweli's Gutter Rainbows. This was followed by the 10-track Dust Ruffle on January 2, 2013, featuring unreleased songs from 2004 to 2010. Between October and November 2013, Grae released EPs titled Gotham Down Cycle 1: Love in Infinity (Lo-Fi), Gotham Down Cycle II: Leviathan, Gotham Down Cycle 3: The Artemis Epoch. In December 2013, Jean combined them into Gotham Down Deluxe.
Grae branched out from music, releasing audiobook The State of Eh in January 2014, and writing, directing and starring in the online sitcom Life with Jeanie. In 2013, Jean had a supporting role in indie film Big Words and in 2015 appeared on the And The Crime Ring episode of CBS sitcom 2 Broke Girls. On October 2, 2016, Jean hosted the Golden Probes. On September 9, 2018, Grae and Quelle Chris released their 15 track joint album Everything's Fine, rated by Rolling Stone as the 22nd best Hip Hop Album of 2018.


== Personal life and musical style ==
On December 3, 2017, Grae got engaged to fellow rapper and producer Quelle Chris. On August 5, 2018, they were married at the W Loft in Brooklyn. He is known for more than 15 studio albums and collaborative albums with fellow rappers.
Grae identifies as non-binary and uses she/her pronouns.Grae's rapping style relies on a complex interplay of shifting rhythms and slanted rhymes. An analysis by Matt Daniels for The Pudding indicated that Jean uses a higher-than-average range of vocabulary in her lyrics.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===
Attack of the Attacking Things (2002)
This Week (2004)
Jeanius (with 9th Wonder) (2008)
Everything's Fine (with Quelle Chris) (2018)


=== Compilation albums ===
Dust Ruffle (2012)
Gotham Down Deluxe (2013)


=== EPs ===
The Bootleg of the Bootleg EP (2003)
Ho x 3: A Christmas Thingy (2012)
Gotham Down: Cycle 1: Love In Infinity (Lo-Fi) (2013)
Gotham Down: Cycle II: Leviathan (2013)
Gotham Down: Cycle 3: The Artemis Epoch (2013)
jeannie. (2014)
#5 (2014)
The State of Eh. A Read Along Album Book Thing. By Jean Grae. (2014)
That's Not How You Do That: An Instructional Album for Adults (2014)
That's Not How You Do That Either: Yet Another Instructional Album for Adults (2015)
iSweatergawd (2015)
Saix (2015)
Jean Grae's CHRISTMAKWHANNUVUSWALIYEARS (2015)
MERRYPOCALYPSE (with Quelle Chris) (2016)
Sevvin (2016)


=== Mixtapes ===
The Official Bootleg (2003)
The Grae Files (2004)
The Grae Mixtape (2004)
Hurricane Jean The Mixtape (2005)
Hurricane Jean: The Jeanius Strikes Again (2005)
Cookies or Comas (2011)


=== Other song appearances ===


== References ==


== External links ==
Jean Grae Discography on Discogs
Jean Grae LyricsPhilip Anthony Bernard (born August 22, 1982) better known by his stage name Grafh, is an American rapper. He has released a collection of mixtapes and an album, Autografh, which was released through EMI Records and Virgin Records.  He is currently an independent artist.
Grafh has also been supported by several well-known artists, including Drake, Trinidad James and Raekwon. Shia LaBeouf praised Grafh in a late-night interview with Carson Daly.  On February 26, 2014, Grafh released his mixtape "New York Dxpe" hosted by DJ Mr. FX In 2016, Grafh collaborated with singer–songwriter Melissa B. on the singles, "Creep" and "The Greatest".


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===
2007: Autografh


=== Mixtapes ===
2003: The Bang Out
2004: The Oracle (Hosted by DJ Green Lantern)
2005: The Preview
2006: I Don't Care
2006: Make It Hot (Hosted by DJ Rob)
2006: Bring Dat Money Back (Hosted by Big Mike)
2006: MySpace Jumpoff (Hosted by Clinton Sparks)
2007: Black Hand America (Hosted by DJ Allure)
2008: The Oracle 2 (Hosted by DJ Green Lantern)
2009: Bring the Goons Out (Hosted by DJ Chaplin)
2010: Best of Grafh: Classic Sh*t, Pt. One
2010: From the Bottom (Hosted by Big Mike)
2011: Classic's (Hosted by DJ Whiteowl)
2011: Pain Killers (Hosted by Love Dinero)
2011: The Saturday Night EP (Collaboration with recording artist Shalone)
2011: The Sunday Morning EP (Collaboration with recording artist Shalone)
2014: New York Dxpe (Hosted by DJ Mr. FX)
2014: 88 Crack Era (Hosted by DJ Ted Smooth)
2016: Pain Killers: Reloaded
2019: Dirty Restaurant (Collaboration with recording artist Flee Lord)
2020: The Oracle 3 (Hosted by DJ Green Lantern)
2020: Good Energy
2021: Stop Calling Art Content (Hosted by DJ Shay)


=== Singles ===
2001: "Keeps It Gangsta"
2003: "Bang Out"
2004: "I Don't Care"
2008: "Like Ohh" (featuring Busta Rhymes & Prinz)
2009: "Bring the Goons Out" (featuring Sheek Louch)
2010: "Bout Dat" (featuring Jim Jones)
2010: "Knock 'Em Down" (featuring Waka Flocka Flame)
2011: "U Know How I Do It"
2011: "Another One"
2015: "Lord of Mercy"
2015: "The Come Up"
2015: "Ain't Near" (featuring Wiz Khalifa and Jadakiss)
2016: "Trap Phone Ringin'"
2016: "Creep" (featuring Melissa B.)
2016: "The Greatest (featuring. Melissa B.)
2016: "Wanna Know"


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
"Shia LaBeouf says Grafh is "Really, really, really good."". YouTube. Retrieved 2020-04-26.Damon J. Blackman (born August 9, 1974), better known by his stage name Dame Grease or simply Grease, is an American record producer from New York City. In 1996, he gained recognition in the hip hop industry through his production work with Bad Boy and The LOX, while also establishing the sound of DMX and Ruff Ryders.


== Music career ==


=== 1996–2006: Career beginnings and Vacant Lot ===
Grease has produced several artists throughout his career. He has worked extensively with East Coast hip hop group, The LOX. Their use of Grease's sounds helped them acquire the street buzz that landed them their deal on Puff Daddy's Bad Boy Records in 1996. Grease produced several songs on LOX's debut album, Money, Power & Respect, including the hit We'll Always Love Big Poppa. He was a producer on fellow Bad Boy artist Mase's quadruple platinum album Harlem World (1997). This led to Grease's work as the primary music producer on DMX's debut It's Dark and Hell Is Hot (1998), producing thirteen of its nineteen tracks. With this project Grease helped Ruff Ryders Entertainment build its image. During this time, Grease mentored Bronx-bred disc jockey Swizz Beatz, who soon became another sample-free producer.
Dame Grease then landed a deal with Priority Records to release music through his own label, Vacant Lot, despite offers to be one of Puff Daddy's legendary Hitmen or an in-house producer on Ruff Ryders.
In 1999, Dame Grease produced two tracks on Tricky's Juxtapose album.
In 2001 Dame Grease began composing music, providing the score for the Steven Seagal/DMX blockbuster Exit Wounds, as well as for the 2003 box-office hit, Cradle 2 the Grave, starring Jet Li, DMX, Gabrielle Union, and Anthony Anderson, and for Never Die Alone (2004).Dame Grease also teamed up with DMX on the "Ain't No Sunshine" soundtrack, a remake of Bill Withers 1972 classic of the same name.
Grease put in work on several music projects throughout 2004 and 2005, including albums from LL Cool J, Kelis, DJ Kay Slay, DJ Envy, Slick Rick, Ol' Dirty Bastard, and an artist on Dr. Dre's Aftermath label named Aimee Terrin. Grease also kept the underground bubbling with "Crown Me", a collaboration between T.I., Cam'ron, and Juelz Santana. In 2006, Dame Grease produced "Life Be My Song", a track on DMX's sixth studio album Year of the Dog... Again.


=== 2007–2013: After the Break ===
After a break in the mid-2000s, Grease reemerged in 2007, securing DJ Drama's lead-off "Takin' Pictures" (featuring Young Jeezy, Rick Ross, Jim Jones, T.I., and Young Buck) and Freeway's single Big Spender (featuring Jay-Z). Grease also produced several tracks on Hell Rell's debut album For the Hell of It.In 2009, Dame Grease produced the track "Lamborghini Dreams" for Curren$y which was to have been included on Curren$y's This Aint No Mixtape: (Championship Edition) but which was never released.In a 2010 radio interview, Dame discussed projects with the LOX, DMX and his Max B project, pairing Max with unreleased verses from Notorious B.I.G. and 2 Pac. In that year he also collaborated with Magix Music Maker, a software, online services and digital content provider, to create a signature software called the Grease-A-Lizer (MAGIX Music Maker Greasealizer Version), which allows users to create their own tracks using "customized loops and keyboard samples" produced by Dame Grease. The product was released March 15, 2010.In 2010, Dame Grease continued producing French Montana. Dame also launched Lot Musik Recording Studio dedicated to fostering young talent.Dame released his own album, Goon Musik in 2011. It includes the single "Sour Diesel", which features N.O.R.E. and Styles P. Meeno, Bigga Threat and Tony Wink provided vocals for the album. Dame made a production appearance on French Montana's Mister 16: Casino Life "All Night". Dame was executive producer on DMX's seventh studio album, Undisputed, which was released in September 2012.In December 2012, Dame Grease ran into Riff Raff while working on DMX's Undisputed album at Good Charlotte Studio in Hollywood. A few days later Riff Raff came back to the studio and recorded Hologram Panda in 7 hours. The mixtape version was released December 12, 2012, and the album version was released April 4, 2013, through 101 Distribution.
In 2013 Dame Grease started working with the "New Outlaw Order" a Faction of 2pac's Outlawz (Makaveli Records/ Thug Life 365). In 2014 Dame Grease began working with Outlaw Order members Outlaw Muszamil and outlawed Misfit313, Outlawed misfit313 contract expired on January 1, 2015. He was picked up by Vacant Lot Records (Dame Grease) and followed up with the album The Uprising Produced by Dame Grease and Niamson Released on December 25, 2015.


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===
Live on Lenox (2000)
What's Really Hood? (2003)
Goon Musik (2008)
Martial Law (2015)
Diary of Wave God (with Massfivestar) (2016)
Live On Lenox Remastered (2016)
Invincible Armour (with Joe Young) (2017)


=== Mixtapes ===
Goon Music 1.5 (The Doomship) (2008) with Max B
Goon Music 2.OWWW (2009) with Max B and French Montana
Tanya aka T6: The Introduction (with Tanya T6) (2009)
Strip Club Music (2010)
Stash Box (2010)
Wave Gang volumes 1–10 (2009–2013)
Hologram Panda (with Riff Raff) (2012)
City of Cocaine (with Cokeboy Brock and Droop Pop) (2016)


=== Singles/EP's ===
"We'll Always Love Big Poppa" Puff Daddy, Faith Evans, 112, the Lox (Tribute To Notorious B.I.G.) (1997)
"Love and Hate" and "Feel the Rush" Mic Vandalz and Dame Grease (1998)
"For Real" Tricky with Dj Muggs and Dame Grease (1999)
"Bom Bom Diggy/Hot Like a Sauna" Tricky with Dame Grease (1999)
"God Love Us" Nas (Nastradamus) (1999)
Live on Lenox (12", Promo, Smplr) (2000)
"Drugs in da Club" (12") (2000)
"Ur Only a Customer" LL Cool J (Exit 13) (2008)
"We Run NY" French Montana, Max B, Dame Grease (2009)
"End of Time" Lumidee, Styles P (2010)
"Crack Babies" Method Man, Joe Young (Invincible Armour) (2017)
"Crack Babies 2.0" Method Man, Raekwon, Masta Killa, Cappadonna, Joe Young (Invincible Armour) (2017)
"Dangerous" E-Moe, C Jenkz, Dame Grease (2017)
"Guerrilla" Vita (rapper), CHG Unfadable (Lifestyle) (2017)


== Scored soundtracks ==
Turn It Up (New Line Home Entertainment 2000)
"Ja Rule, Pras, Robert Adetuyi"
Exit Wounds (Warner Home Video 2001) – Producer"Steven Segal, DMX, Andrzej Bartkowiak"
Cradle 2 the Grave (Warner Home Video 2003) – Producer"Jet Li, DMX, Andrzej Bartkowiak"
Never Die Alone ( Fox Home Entertainment 2004)
"DMX, David Arquette, Ernest R. Dickerson"


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website 
Dame Grease on SoundCloud
Official Wave Gang website
Official Vacant Lot Records website
Dame Grease at AllMusic
Damon Blackman discography at DiscogsPercy Carey (born June 11, 1970), also known by the stage names MF Grimm, Grimm Reaper, GM Grimm and originally Build and Destroy, is an American underground rapper, music producer, CEO, and Eisner Award-nominated comic book writer from New York City. Grimm has released five solo albums, five collaborative albums and two compilation albums.


== Early life ==
Percy Carey grew up in the Upper West Side section of Manhattan. His neighbor, Morgan Freeman, helped arrange for him to be cast as a child actor on Sesame Street, he first appeared in Season 7, Episode 0806. He appeared on the show from age 5 to around age 9. "One episode, I lost my tooth, and me and Big Bird had to go through Sesame Street and try to find it," Carey remembers. The idea for that episode came about after Carey told Jim Henson about a dream he'd had the night before.During his teenage years Grimm became involved with the hip hop community and decided that he wanted to be an MC at the age of 14. His mother supported this dream and bought him turntables and a microphone. Carey was expelled from Park West High School in Hell's Kitchen after beating up a dean over owed drug money.


== Career ==
MF Grimm's career began in the late 1980s where he performed in New York City. He later went on tour with MC Lyte as well. Into the 1990s Grimm continued to perform at freestyle competitions and performed alongside rappers Lord Finesse, GZA and Large Professor, amongst others. MF Grimm's most recent releases include a three-part conceptual series of albums with producer Drasar Monumental titled Good Morning Vietnam.


=== 1990s ===
In the early nineties Carey moved to California, where he formed a DJ/rapper group called the Gravediggaz (not to be confused with the Gravediggaz) and through the mid-nineties worked together with Roc Raida as his DJ. In 1993, Grimm placed third at the World Supremacy Battle, already known as an experienced battle rapper. That year, he released his first 12" single, So Whatcha Want Nigga? (later released on the Scars & Memories album in 2005) and performed at the Jack The Rapper convention on Execution Night, sharing the stage with Lady of Rage, Tupac, and Tha Dogg Pound, in Atlanta. He also collaborated with hip-hop legends like Kool G Rap, Kurious and KMD, appearing on albums and singles by them.In 1993, MF Grimm had recorded an album's worth of material that was to serve as his debut album. After being shot and hospitalized, a lot of the material was stolen or lost, as it wasn't expected that he would survive his coma. After he woke up from the coma Grimm was able to retrieve some of the lost records and some of this material went on to be released later as singles, and later formed the 2005 compilation album Scars & Memories.
In the mid-late 1990s, MF Grimm went on to release several 12" singles on Bobbito's Fondle 'Em label and started collaborating extensively with label mate MF Doom whose debut album Operation: Doomsday was recorded in Grimm's basement, and for which Grimm served as an executive producer (financing the project and supplying samples for the album). It was during this time that Grimm founded the Day By Day Entertainment label, as well as the hip hop collective Monsta Island Czars with MF Doom.


=== 2000s ===
MF Grimm's first release of the 2000s was the collaborative MF EP with MF DOOM on Brick Records. The release included remixes, as well as new material and the instrumental versions to every track.
In 2001, MF Grimm recorded his debut album, The Downfall of Ibliys: A Ghetto Opera while on bail after his prison sentencing. The entire album was recorded during a twenty four-hour period, and featured production and appearances from Count Bass D and MF DOOM. The album was released on Grimm's Day By Day Entertainment label, although he did not hear the album until after his release from prison several years later. Around the time of MF Grimm's release, Day By Day Entertainment released a compilation of MF Grimm and MF DOOM material titled Best of MF. This compilation included features both artists had done, as well as several then-unreleased tracks. Some of the tracks would later be re-released under different titles on various projects.
In addition to releasing his own material, Grimm has served as an executive producer on various prolific and now-classic albums from the period, including Operation: Doomsday, KMD's Black Bastards and Escape from Monsta Island!, amongst others.
After his release from prison, Grimm completed his second album Digital Tears: E-mail from Purgatory in 2004 under his Monsta Island Czars moniker Superstar Jet Jaguar. The album's lyrics as well as drum beats were all created while in prison using a portable drum machine that Grimm managed to hide from the prison guards. Following that release he and MF DOOM collaborated once more for his third album, Special Herbs + Spices Volume 1, also released in 2004. This album featured MF Grimm freestyling over MF DOOM beats taken from his Special Herbs instrumental album series. Following this release, MF Grimm released a compilation of material recorded and released prior to The Downfall of Ibliys: a ghetto opera. Underground hit singles, as well as some harder-to-find material, were included and the compilation was released in 2005 as Scars & Memories
In 2006, MF Grimm released a 60-track, triple-CD album, American Hunger, the first ever in hip hop on his Day By Day Entertainment label. The album also featured members of Monsta Island Czars. Each of the three discs was intended as a separate "meal" -- "Breakfast," "Lunch" and "The Last Supper." Included on the album is the track "The Book of Daniel," a scathing diss track recorded in response to MF DOOM's diss against Monsta Island Czars (referring to them as "midgets into crunk").
Grimm's life story was retold in a graphic novel autobiography illustrated by Ronald Wimberly, Sentences: The Life of MF Grimm, which was released by DC Comics' Vertigo imprint in September 2007. Two months later, MF Grimm appeared on National Public Radio to relate his life story and future plans. That year MF Grimm also released the concept album The Hunt for the Gingerbread Man, with a mixtape The Order of the Baker Mixtape released as a prequel.
In 2008, Grimm, under his real name Percy Carey, was nominated for two Eisner Awards for Sentences, Best Reality Based Work and Best Lettering. He was also nominated for, and won, two Glyph Awards for Best Cover and Story of the Year.In 2009, Grimm released a short mixtape on the Day By Day Entertainment website entitled Story: Substance, Style, Structure and the Principles of Hip Hop as a promotional release preceding his work in the new decade.


=== 2010s ===
In 2010, Grimm released his seventh studio album You Only Live Twice: The Audio Graphic Novel which was accompanied by a 13-page comic book based on the album by Jim Mahfood.
In 2012, he collaborated with underground producer Drasar Monumental and the Vendetta Vinyl label to record a series of releases. The first release by the duo was a mixtape entitled Preemptive Strike followed by Good Morning Vietnam. The duo followed up their success by releasing a full-length sequel Good Morning Vietnam 2: The Golden Triangle in November 2013. This release further explored the Vietnam concept, and introduced heroin as a theme as well. The duo released the third and final iteration to the series, Good Morning Vietnam 3: The Phoenix Program November 25, 2014.
On February 4, 2015, MF Grimm announced the release of a compilation of his love songs for release on February 14, 2015, titled MF Love Songs. The release is slated to include material from across his entire career.


=== 2020s ===
On March 15, 2021, MF Grimm released The Hunt For The Gingerbread Man 2: Get The Dough produced by Darko the Super, premiering an animated music video for the track Candy Rain (Falling Down) directed by NutzenTV.


== Aliases ==
MF Grimm has used a number of aliases over the years. He was given the name "Build and Destroy" by King Sun as a teen, but switched to the name "The Grimm Reaper" by the end of the 1980s. "MF Grimm" came about from his time living in California, where he was often told that he had "mad flows." As part of Monsta Island Czars, Grimm has used the names Jet Jaguar and Superstar Jet Jaguar. After his release from prison, Grimm also used the GM Grimm moniker, short for Grandmaster Grimm. Since 2004, Grimm has continued to use the "MF Grimm" moniker, although he sometimes refers to himself as "GM Grimm" or "Jet Jaguar."


== Personal life ==
In 1994, Grimm survived an attempted murder where he was shot seven times by rival drug dealers, following a previous three shots in an earlier murder attempt in 1986. As a result of the 1994 attack, he was deafened, blinded, paralyzed from the waist down, and comatose; doctors predicted that he would have dulled senses and be paralyzed for the rest of his life. MF Grimm's half-brother and manager Jansen Smalls died in the attack. As a result of this attack, all the music labels interested in Grimm's music cut all contact with him. Grimm recovered full vision, hearing, and speech ability, but still uses a wheelchair.Grimm founded label Day By Day Entertainment in the late-1990s. At around the same time, he put together his Godzilla-inspired MC collective, the Monsta Island Czars, which at the time also featured MF Doom. However, to pay for the extensive medical bills from his hospitalization, Grimm turned back to drug dealing. This lifestyle eventually caught up with him again when his organization was taken down by the police.
Facing narcotics conspiracy charges, Grimm was sentenced to life imprisonment under the Rockefeller Drug Laws in 2000. Before his sentence began, Grimm recorded his debut album, The Downfall of Ibliys: A Ghetto Opera. In 2003, his life sentence was reduced and was eventually released.


=== Relationship with MF DOOM ===
MF Grimm and MF DOOM became friends in the early 1990s, bonding over mutual interests in Hip Hop, comics, and mutual friends. Grimm featured on KMD's 1993 single What a Niggy Know (Remix), credited as "The Grimm Reaper." After the death of DOOM's brother DJ Subroc and Grimm's paralysis, the two bonded, living together and looking after one another. Although Grimm maintained a presence in Hip Hop, DOOM did not reemerge until the late 1990s. Grimm, in his capacity as executive producer, funded Operation: Doomsday as well as providing the samples which appeared on the album. Grimm also funded the release of KMD's second album Black Bastards, once again serving as an executive producer.
In 2000, DOOM and Grimm released the collaborative MF EP, featuring both artists splitting the record's material, and including the instrumental versions. Upon Grimm's release from prison in 2003, Day By Day Entertainment released a compilation of MF Grimm and MF DOOM material as Best of MF. In 2004, the duo released a collaborative album of Grimm rapping over Doom's Special Herbs beats called Special Herbs + Spices Volume 1.


== Discography ==


=== Solo albums ===
2002: The Downfall of Ibliys: A Ghetto Opera
2004: Digital Tears: E-Mail From Purgatory (as Superstar Jet Jaguar)
2005: Scars & Memories
2006: American Hunger
2007: The Hunt for the Gingerbread Man
2010: You Only Live Twice: The Audio Graphic Novel
2017: American Hunger: Rebirth
2019: American Hunger Rebirth, Vol. 2: Trials, Tribulations, Humiliation and Elevation
2021: The Hunt for the Gingerbread Man 2: Get the Dough


=== Compilation albums ===
2003: Best of MF (with MF Doom)
2015: MF Love Songs


=== Collaboration albums ===
2000: MF EP (with MF DOOM)
2004: Special Herbs + Spices Volume 1 (with MF DOOM)
2012: Good Morning Vietnam (with Drasar Monumental)
2013: Good Morning Vietnam 2: The Golden Triangle (with Drasar Monumental)
2014: Good Morning Vietnam 3: The Phoenix Program (with Drasar Monumental)


== References ==


== External links ==
Official MF Grimm Facebook page
Official Day By Day Entertainment WebsitePeter Cory Pankey, Jr. (born June 22, 1987), better known by his stage name Cory Gunz, is an American rapper from The Bronx, New York City. Gunz is currently signed to After Platinum Records, Young Money Entertainment, Cash Money Records, and Universal Republic Records.


== Career ==
At age 14, Gunz was first signed by Tommy Mottola to Casablanca Records and Def Jam Recordings. Jay-Z shepherded him into a joint venture through The Island Def Jam Music Group. He was featured on a remix of Rihanna's single "If It's Lovin' That You Want". Gunz mixtape The Apprentice 3 – Season Finale has amassed over 85,000 listens on the mixtape website DatPiff. He also contributed a verse to the original version of Lil Wayne's "A Milli" before it was replaced with new verses by Wayne for the album version.In 2009, Gunz signed a contract with After Platinum Records. In early 2010, Gunz signed with Young Money Entertainment and Universal Motown. Gunz has worked with actor and musician Nick Cannon. In 2011, he was featured on Lil Wayne's single "6 Foot 7 Foot" from Tha Carter IV. Also in 2011, Gunz starred on MTV's "Son of A Gun" a reality show that follows Gunz after and before he got signed by Young Money. The show features appearances from close friend Nick Cannon. It was announced that Universal Republic Records was going defunct, all of the artists on the roster moved from the label including (Cory Gunz) was being moved to Republic Records making the label itself revived. Gunz was a featured artist on Dirti Diana's 2013 mixtape R.I.P. To The Competition. On July 16, 2013, he released his first mixtape in two years with Datz WTF I'm Talkin Bout, it featured guest appearances by Busta Rhymes, Charlie Rock, Mack Maine, Wiz Khalifa, and Juicy J among others. In March 2014, Gunz revealed he was working on an EP titled Kriminal Mind and following its release he would release his debut studio album.


== Controversies ==


=== Legal issues ===
On January 28, 2012, Gunz was arrested for possession of a gun and faced three and a half years in prison, which was lowered to a 2+1⁄2-year sentence. Cory Gunz' father,  Peter Gunz admitted that he had encouraged his son to keep a low profile and stop releasing music for a while in the aftermath of his arrest. In an interview from December 17, 2013, Peter Gunz stated that Cory Gunz was trying to work on new records in Miami while on probation.


== Personal life ==
Pankey is the father of twin daughters.


== Discography ==


=== Compilation albums ===


=== Mixtapes ===


=== Singles ===


==== As a featured artist ====


=== Guest appearances ===


== Filmography ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official websiteKeith Edward Elam (July 17, 1961 – April 19, 2010), better known by his stage name Guru (a backronym for Gifted Unlimited Rhymes Universal), was an American rapper, record producer and actor. He was a member of the hip hop duo Gang Starr, along with DJ Premier. He was born in Boston, Massachusetts.In 2012, About.com placed him #49 on their list of Top 50 MCs of Our Time, and The Source ranked him #30 on their list of Top 50 Lyricists of All Time, saying "Guru dropped some of the most thoughtful rhymes on wax".Guru died on April 19, 2010, from myeloma at age 48.


== Early life ==
Elam was born in the Roxbury neighborhood of Boston, Massachusetts. His father, Harry Justin Elam served both as a judge and a lawyer and he became the first African American judge appointed to the Boston Municipal Court of Massachusetts and he later also became Chief Justice of the same court and finally as a judge he was appointed as an Associate Justice of the Massachusetts Superior Court. Prior to his judgeship years, between 1971 and 1988, he was a prominent lawyer in the city of Boston from 1952 to 1971 and his mother, Barbara, was the co-director of libraries in the Boston Public Schools system. He attended the Advent School on Beacon Hill in Boston, Noble and Greenough School in Dedham, Massachusetts, and Cohasset High School in Cohasset, Massachusetts for high school. Elam graduated with a degree in business administration from Morehouse College in Atlanta and took graduate classes at the Fashion Institute of Technology in Manhattan.


== Musical career ==
Elam began his music career under the pseudonym MC Keithy E but later changed his stage name to Guru. He founded Gang Starr in 1987. The group initially released three records, produced by The 45 King, on the Wild Pitch Records record label, but these records received little attention. After a change in lineup, the group consisted of rapper Guru and producer DJ Premier. Gang Starr released its first LP No More Mr. Nice Guy on Wild Pitch Records; the group achieved a sizable following and released six critically acclaimed and influential albums from 1989 to 2003. Two albums, Moment of Truth (1998) and compilation Full Clip: A Decade of Gang Starr (1999) were certified gold in the United States by the RIAA. Gang Starr made archetypal East Coast hip hop with Guru's rhyming described as sharp-eyed but anti-ostentatious.In 1993, Guru released the first in a series of four solo albums while still a member of Gang Starr. Jazzmatazz, Vol. 1 featured collaborations with Donald Byrd, N'Dea Davenport, MC Solaar and Roy Ayers and received positive reviews. His second solo LP, Jazzmatazz, Vol. 2: The New Reality, featured Chaka Khan, Ramsey Lewis, Branford Marsalis and Jamiroquai. The third installment, Jazzmatazz, Vol. 3: Streetsoul, was released in 2000, but it received less positive reviews. In reference to the Jazzmatazz project, Guru told Pete Lewis of Blues & Soul: "Back around '93—when I first came up with the Jazzmatazz concept—I was noticing how a lot of cats were digging in the crates and sampling jazz breaks to make hip hop records. But while I thought that was cool, I wanted to take it to the next level and actually create a new genre by getting the actual dudes we were sampling into the studio to jam over hip hop beats with some of the top vocalists of the time. You know, the whole thing was experimental, but I knew it was an idea that would spawn some historic music."In 1994, Guru appeared on the Red Hot Organization's compilation album Stolen Moments: Red Hot + Cool. The album, meant to raise awareness and funds in support of the AIDS epidemic in relation to the African American community, was heralded as the album of the year by Time magazine.
Guru's first solo album not a part the Jazzmatazz series, Baldhead Slick & da Click, was released in 2001 to poor reviews. The album reached #22 on the Billboard R&B/Hip Hop album charts. Version 7.0: The Street Scriptures, was released in 2005 on Guru's own record label, 7 Grand Records. The album was produced by labelmate Solar. It reached #54 on the Billboard R&B albums charts and received mixed reviews.Guru's final releases were the fourth installment in the Jazzmatazz series, released in June 2007; and Guru 8.0: Lost And Found, released May 19, 2009 (also in collaboration with Solar). A final Gang Starr album, One of the Best Yet, was released in 2019.


== Death ==
On February 28, 2010, Guru went into cardiac arrest and, following surgery, fell into a coma. It was claimed that Guru had briefly awakened from his coma but died on April 19, 2010, at the age of 48, from multiple myeloma, a form of blood cancer. Guru was survived by his parents, three siblings, and a son named Keith Casim. His production partner, Solar, claimed that Guru had momentarily awakened from his coma to compose a letter to the public, although DJ Premier and members of Guru's family stated that he never regained consciousness. Guru's family claimed that Solar had prevented them from having contact with Guru during his illness just before his death; the validity of the deathbed letter was consequently challenged by Guru's family. In an interview on Conspiracy Worldwide Radio, Solar claimed that he was protective of Guru, and everything he had said was true. This interview was met by extreme emotion from the hip hop community and did little to clear the controversy surrounding his actions.DJ Premier produced a tribute mix to Guru and has released a public letter along with Guru's sister Patricia Elam. Harry J. Elam, an older brother, wrote a personal memoir in remembrance published in The Boston Globe on April 23, 2010. The Elam family had a Guru tribute website set up where visitors were able to view tributes and sign a memorial page. Guru's nephew Justin Nicholas-Elam Ruff made a 16-minute documentary in which he narrated the story of his late uncle.At the 2011 Grammy Awards, Guru's name was not mentioned in the annual retrospective of musicians who had died since the 2010 awards. On April 21, 2011, Revive Da Live Big Band held a tribute show for Guru at Le Poisson Rouge in New York City. The show paid homage to Guru's Jazzmatazz series and featured a full jazz band tribute, with all proceeds going towards the Elam family. During the concert, Babygrande Records donated $5000 to Guru's son, K.C. Elam.


== Legacy ==
The French city of Montpellier named a small street "Allée Guru" after the rapper, citing his influence on both hip hop and jazz.


== Discography ==

Studio albumsGuru's Jazzmatazz, Vol. 1 (1993)
Guru's Jazzmatazz, Vol. 2: The New Reality (1995)
Guru's Jazzmatazz, Vol. 3: Streetsoul (2000)
Baldhead Slick & da Click (2001)
Version 7.0: The Street Scriptures (2005)
Guru's Jazzmatazz, Vol. 4: The Hip Hop Jazz Messenger: Back to the Future (2007)
Guru 8.0: Lost and Found (2009)


== Filmography ==


=== Film ===


=== Television ===


=== Video games ===


== References ==


== External links ==

Guru
Guru at AllMusic
Guru discography at DiscogsGary Grice (born August 22, 1966), better known by his stage names GZA ( JIZ-ə) and The Genius, is an American rapper. A founding member of the hip hop group Wu-Tang Clan, GZA is the group's "spiritual head", being both the first member in the group to receive a record deal and being the oldest member. He has appeared on his fellow Wu-Tang members' solo projects, and has maintained a successful solo career starting with Liquid Swords (1995).
His lyrical style often dismisses typical rap story lines in favor of science and wide-ranging philosophies and has been characterized as "armed with sharp metaphors and a smooth flow". An analysis of GZA's lyrics found that he has the second largest vocabulary in popular hip hop music. He teamed up with an education group to promote science education in New York City through hip hop.


== Early life ==
GZA was born Gary Grice in Brooklyn, New York City, on August 22, 1966. He developed an interest in hip-hop by attending block parties as a child in the early 1970s, becoming involved in breakdance, graffiti, and DJing. Early on he developed an interest in writing, studying Mother Goose and nursery rhyme. In 1974–1976, before moving from Staten Island to Brooklyn, he listened to The Last Poets; however, he was attracted by profanity rather than content, and didn't understand the underlying messages until many years later. The Last Poets, as well as songs by The Isley Brothers, the Commodores, and the O'Jays had a big part in his early life, especially regarding the tone and cadence of speech. Later on, he began to listen to hip hop and R&B, for example by Secret Weapon and Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five. In 1982, Grice dropped out of high school in the tenth grade.He formed a three-man group with his cousins, Robert Diggs and Russell Jones, who would later be known as RZA and Ol' Dirty Bastard. At the time he didn't like the sound of his voice. The group, FOI: Force of the Imperial Master, and later All in Together, saw the three rapping and DJing, switching names and performing local shows; since they lived in different boroughs, GZA and Ol' Dirty would travel from Brooklyn out to Staten Island to meet up with their cousin RZA, after which the three would travel across New York City and challenge other MCs to battles. He left school in the 10th grade, but nurtured his affection for science as he developed his skills as a lyricist.After some years of this, GZA was signed to Cold Chillin' Records as a solo artist under the name The Genius. He released his debut album, Words from the Genius (1991), produced mostly by Easy Mo Bee, but it failed to sell due to lack of promotion. This, combined with his rocky experience on tour, fed up GZA and he asked to be released from the label. The album's beat selection is similar to the classic boom-bap sound of the early 1990s, while the lyricism subject is the everyday situations of an individual living in the parts of New York. At the time he worked as a bicycle messenger.


== Wu-Tang Clan ==
In 1992, GZA joined the Wu-Tang Clan, a group of nine, formed by his cousin RZA. GZA had some high-profile appearances on the group's debut album, Enter the Wu-Tang (36 Chambers) (1993), including a solo track, "Clan in da Front". This, combined with appearances on other Clan members' albums such as Return to the 36 Chambers: The Dirty Version (1995) and Only Built 4 Cuban Linx... (1995) brought him much recognition. According to Method Man, "we form like Voltron and GZA happens to be the head".


== Solo career ==


=== 1995–1999: Liquid Swords, Beneath the Surface ===
These guest appearances were followed up in 1995 with GZA's second studio album, Liquid Swords, produced and recorded entirely in the basement studio by RZA, with the participation of all original Clan members. It was released on November 7 by Geffen Records. The album's complex composition included dialogue sampled from the film Shogun Assassin. The album was met with positive reviews and sold well. It is considered to be one of the best albums from the Wu-Tang camp. It peaked at the #9 spot on the Billboard 200 chart and #2 on the Top R&B/Hip Hop Albums chart. On October 8, 2015, the Recording Industry Association of America announced that the album had earned a Platinum certification for having sold more than 1 million copies. It became the first Wu-Tang-related album to get certified since 2004, when Method Man and Ghostface Killah both earned plaques. In addition, he directed music videos for four album singles.After appearing on the Wu-Tang Clan's second album, Wu-Tang Forever (1997), his third studio album Beneath the Surface was released by MCA Records in 1999. The album and its singles "Crash Your Crew" and "Breaker, Breaker" met with critical acclaim. The album earned a Gold certification by RIAA, peaked at #9 on the Billboard 200 chart, and topped the Top R&B/Hip Hop Albums chart.


=== 2000–2009: Legend of the Liquid Sword, Pro Tools ===
In 2000 the single "Ich lebe für Hip Hop" was released with DJ Tomekk and placed 11th in the German charts. 
In 2002, a sequel to his second solo album was released, Legend of the Liquid Sword. It was well-received by critics, yet did not sell well and failed to go Gold. GZA spent 2004 touring, both solo and with the Clan, and made an appearance with RZA in Jim Jarmusch's film Coffee and Cigarettes, opposite Bill Murray. The two also appeared on the Chappelle Show's skits "Wu Tang Financial" and "Racial Draft".In 2005, GZA and DJ Muggs (the producer for hip-hop group Cypress Hill) released collaboration album Grandmasters. Muggs provided all the production for the album, which saw GZA using chess as a metaphor for the rap game, with most of the songs having a chess-themed title.
In the summer of 2008, his fifth solo studio album Pro Tools was released by Babygrande Records. It featured production from Black Milk and Jay "Waxxx" Garfield, RZA, Mathematics and True Master. A very controversial song on the album was entitled "Paper Plates", a smooth flowing response aimed at rival rapper 50 Cent. After the release, GZA toured various parts of Europe on a "Liquid Swords Tour", where he performed songs from Liquid Swords as well as Pro Tools. He later toured parts of the US.


=== 2010–present: Dark Matter ===
In 2010, he spoke at Harvard University, and since then has visited, among others, MIT, Oxford, USC, NYU, Cornell, where he met with scientists such as David Kaiser and Sallie W. Chisholm to seek inspiration. In 2012, he talked "hip-hop and science" with Neil deGrasse Tyson.To improve science education in New York City and beyond in late 2012, with the assistance of Columbia University's professor Christopher Emdin and website Rap Genius, he began work on a pilot program called Science Genius B.A.T.T.L.E.S. (Bringing Attention to Transforming, Teaching and Learning Science). This initiative motivates young high school students, especially African-American and Latino students, who together make up 70 percent of New York City's student body, to learn science through hip hop, creating scientific raps and engaging in a rap competition.In the meantime, he continued to work on a related, new studio album called Dark Matter, which is based on a journey through spacetime, universe and physics. In late 2015, GZA canceled European tour dates to focus on working on the album with composer Vangelis. It is planned to be one in a series of albums related to Earth, with the following conceived around oceans. GZA hinted that the albums will be without parental advisory, profanity and nudity.In February 2015, GZA released a single "The Mexican" (a cover of Babe Ruth's song), featuring guitarist Tom Morello and singer Kara Lane. They performed the song live along with The Roots on The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon. On June 30, 2016, he released a new space-themed track, "The Spark", produced by Paul Ryder, for NASA's project "Destination: Jupiter", in celebration of the agency's ongoing Juno Mission.In 2020, GZA provided a voice role in Netflix's Kipo and the Age of Wonderbeasts as Bad Billions, and contributed a song to the series.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===
Words from the Genius  (1991)
Liquid Swords (1995)
Beneath the Surface (1999)
Legend of the Liquid Sword (2002)
Pro Tools (2008)


=== Collaboration albums ===
GrandMasters with DJ Muggs (2005)


== References ==


== External links ==

GZA on Facebook
GZA on Twitter
GZA on Genius
GZA at IMDbJasun Wardlaw (April 6, 1973 – October 22, 2003) better known by his stage name Half a Mill, was a Brooklyn-based American rapper.


== Career ==
Half a Mill was considered an underground rapper in the early 1990s. His mainstream breakthrough came in 1997 when he scored a guest spot on supergroup the Firm's only release, The Album.


== Personal life and death ==
Wardlaw would commit suicide by shooting himself in the head in Brooklyn's Albany Projects on October 22, 2003. His body was found by police inside his apartment. He left behind a son, Jasun Jabbar Wardlaw Jr., who is a rapper and actor.Half a Mill was the subject of the 2010 full-length documentary Player Hating: A Love Story by filmmaker Maggie Hadleigh-West.


== Discography ==


== See also ==
List of murdered hip hop musicians


== References ==Tegan Joshua Anthony Chambers (born December 20, 1999), known professionally as Sleepy Hallow, is an American rapper making Brooklyn drill music. Originally from Jamaica, Chambers grew up in the Flatbush section of Brooklyn in New York City alongside frequent collaborator Sheff G.In 2018, he had his first breakthrough viral single with "Flows", which also featured Sheff G. In August 2020, his single "Deep End Freestyle" featuring Fousheé was certified platinum by the RIAA. In August 2021, his single "2055" peaked at number 51 on the US Billboard Hot 100, becoming his highest-charting song. He is currently signed to Winners Circle Entertainment and RCA Records.On May 16, 2023, Chambers was indicted along with 32 other alleged gang members including Sheff G for a multitude of gang conspiracy charges.On May 30, 2023, Chambers announced on his Instagram story that he has been released on bail, and is now waiting for the trial to start.


== Early life ==
As a child, Chambers immigrated from Jamaica to the Flatbush section of Brooklyn, New York City. Around the age of 12, he started to rap. He later picked the name "Sleepy Hallow" as his rap name as that was his name in the streets. Chambers dropped out of school in the ninth grade. He first met friend and collaborator Sheff G when the two were preparing to fight, but stopped when Sheff G was impressed with how Chambers carried himself.


== Career ==
He, Sheff G, and DizzyGotBands were signed to former NFL player, Junior Galette's music record label, Nula Entertainment from 2017 to 2018.In 2019, Sleepy Hallow released his debut mixtape, Don't Sleep. In the same year, Winners Circle Entertainment was founded, with Sleepy Hallow as one of the first signees.In 2020, he released his second mixtape, Sleepy for President. The mixtape featured the hit single "Deep End Freestyle" featuring Fousheé, which peaked on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart at number 80 on June 20, 2020. The single has over 85 million streams and was certified gold by RIAA in August 2020.In August 2020, Winners Circle Entertainment started a partnership with RCA Records. Sleepy Hallow and Sheff G released the single "Tip Toe", produced by Great John.In June 2021, he released his first studio album, Still Sleep? The album includes the single, "2055", which was released alongside a video that sees an animated Sleepy Hallow in an alternate, futuristic universe. The single would be certified double platinum in March 2022.In May 2022, he released his single "Die Young", which features Canadian rapper 347aidan.
In September 2022, he released his single "2 Mins of Pain".In November 2022, he released the single "Marie".In May 2023, Sleepy Hallow was charged in a 140-count indictment, as the district attorney's office said the gang is linked to 12 shootings and a murder that was caught on camera.On September 15, 2023, Sleepy Hallow released his second studio album since getting out of jail “Boy Meets World". It features songs such as "GBG" featuring Marshmello and "Anxiety" featuring Doechii.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===


=== Mixtapes ===


=== Singles ===


==== As lead artist ====


==== As featured artist ====


=== Other charted and certified songs ===


== Guest appearances ==


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Sleepy Hallow at IMDbCharles Eddie-Lee Hamilton, Jr. (born November 10, 1987) is an American rapper. In addition to his solo career, he was a former member of The Chosen Few, and was also a member of the Lupe Fiasco's All City Chess Club. Intent on pursuing a solo career as a rapper, Hamilton signed to independent record label Demevolist Music Group. In 2008, Hamilton released a series of mixtapes entitled The Hamiltonization Process, and on December 8, 2008, Hamilton independently released his debut album entitled The Pink Lavalamp.
Hamilton gained major recognition after being featured on the cover of the XXL's 2009 Freshmen Class issue and signing an undisclosed million dollar distribution record deal with Interscope Records, in 2008. Hamilton was due to release his major-label debut album for Interscope entitled This Perfect Life but, in late 2009, due to Hamilton's undiagnosed and alleged bipolar disorder at the time, he became a frequent source of controversy and public scrutiny for his conduct on social media and in public settings, causing Hamilton to be dropped from the record label.
In 2010, Hamilton signed a new record deal with NewCo Records and was due to release a new debut album entitled My Heart, but for unknown reasons Hamilton left the label and shelved the album. Through 2011–14, Hamilton began to independently release mixtapes, frequently from his personal blogs, and also had much of his unreleased shelved musical projects leak online.
In early 2015, Hamilton signed new record deals with Turn First Records and Republic Records. In 2014, Hamilton released an EP entitled The Black Box. Hamilton released his debut major-label album entitled Hamilton, Charles in 2016. In 2015, Hamilton made a musical cameo in the hip hop TV show Empire.


== Life and career ==


=== 1987–2007: Early life and career beginnings ===
Charles Hamilton was born and raised in Cleveland, Ohio. He was exposed to music at an early age: "My mother was an entertainment journalist for the Cleveland Call and Post, so she would take me with her to events when I was just a baby." Hamilton stated his mother always made sure he had an instrument around him. His mother put different kinds of instruments in the basement of their Cleveland home, but he naturally gravitated to the keyboard. Hamilton has stated, "At first, I was just playing the rhythm of the songs I would hear... The older I got, the more proficient I got at hearing the notes." For most of his life, Hamilton was self-taught. Picking up the lead and bass guitar in his teenage years, as well as the drums and harmonica. Hamilton has stated that listening to other genres of music, being exposed to different cultures and experiencing life helped mold his musical sound. Hamilton would leave from his mother's home at the age of 18 and would at times be homeless spending his nights at his friends' houses.Hamilton would later utilize a studio built at the Frederick Douglass Academy. Hamilton would spend countless hours in the studio, developing his craft and his own signature sound. Hamilton stated, "The Lab (FDA's studio) means so much to me, because when I literally didn't have anywhere else to go in the world, I can just go into my beloved alma mater and purge myself creatively." The studio in the Frederick Douglass Academy is where most of Charles Hamilton's music is made. Hamilton has also stated, regarding FDA's studio, that "[I] can do my thing in other studios. It's just something about home that makes my music breathe." Hamilton attended Rice High School in Harlem, where he would also participate in freestyle rap battles.
Hamilton would later meet his future manager Le'Roy Benros after offering to help with a music event that he was organizing. When Benros eventually heard his music he was "blown away" and arranged a meeting at Hamilton's high school in Harlem. Benros set about promoting his first client in any way that he could, burning CDs, putting him on at showcases and securing his first appearance on the influential blog "You Heard That New". He also managed to introduce Hamilton to Theo Sedlmayr, one of the most powerful entertainment lawyers in the music industry.


=== 2008–09: Signing to Interscope Records, "The Hamiltonization Process" and The Pink Lavalamp ===
June 16, 2008 saw the release of Hamilton's debut mixtape Crash Landed; a week later, on June 27, 2008, Hamilton released his mixtape Outside Looking. On August 14, 2008, Hamilton announced he was officially signed to Interscope Records, after well known artist/producer/songwriter Pharrell introduced Hamilton to Interscope Records CEO at the time, Jimmy Iovine. Later in August, Hamilton would announce that he would release a series of 8 mixtapes entitled "The Hamiltonization Process"; it would be titled after his former personal blog at the time. On September 2, 2008, Hamilton released his mixtape Death Of The Mixtape Rapper, which would be the first release in "The Hamiltonization Process": a series of mixtapes written and produced by Hamilton which would lead up to the release of his debut album, The Pink Lavalamp.On September 16, 2008, Hamilton released his mixtape And Then They Played Dilla. The mixtape was a dedication to producer J Dilla, and the mixtape cover was based on J Dilla's critically acclaimed album Donuts. On September 30, 2008, Hamilton and Demevolist Music Group released their mixtape Staff Development. Then, on October 15, 2008, Hamilton released his mixtape It's Charles Hamilton; the mixtape cover was based on Nas's critically acclaimed album Illmatic. On October 28, 2008, Hamilton released his mixtape The L Word. A few weeks later, on November 11, 2008, Hamilton released his mixtape Sonic The Hamilton. On November 18, 2008, Hamilton released his debut single "Brooklyn Girls"; the music video would feature a cameo appearance from pornographic actress Lacey Duvalle, who Hamilton had earlier that year made a dedication song towards entitled "Lacey Duvalle". On November 25, 2008, Hamilton released his mixtape Intervention.On December 8, 2008, Hamilton released his debut album entitled The Pink Lavalamp. The album was originally supposed to had been released as Hamilton's major-label debut studio album, but due to Hamilton disagreements with Interscope Records about having his single "Brooklyn Girls" placed on the album's tracklist, he decided it would be best to release it as a free independent release with his label Demevolist Music Group. The album would go on to have critically acclaimed reviews and build Hamilton a cult following; it would be the last release in "The Hamiltonization Process".In 2008, Hamilton was chosen for the XXL's 2009 Freshmen cover issue alongside fellow rappers Wale, B.o.B, Asher Roth, Cory Gunz, Blu, Mickey Factz, Ace Hood, Curren$y and Kid Cudi.


=== 2009: This Perfect Life and release from Interscope ===
On February 13, 2009, Hamilton released his mixtape Well Isn't This Awkward. The mixtape lyrically followed the story of a fan who had a romantic obsession with the singer-songwriter Rihanna, and instrumentally included various samples of her music.That May, a video went viral of Hamilton first rap battling, then getting assaulted by his former girlfriend/fellow rapper Briana Latrise, the stepdaughter of Mary J. Blige, due to Hamilton referencing during the battle Latrise having an abortion. On May 25, 2009, during an interview, they publicly apologized to each other, with Hamilton stating, "I apologize honestly for putting some things out there that shouldn't have been out there. I understand it; it was the heat of the moment, and I didn't get the chance to really talk to you about it. I just wanted to tell you I apologize because I know what I shouldn't have said", and with Latrise remarking, "I'm going to thank you for your apology. I'm going to apologize for acting outside of the norm. We're going to talk about our personal business, on our personal time."Hamilton was to release his first studio album on Interscope, entitled This Perfect Life, in 2009. According to Hamilton's blog at the time, the album was to be released digitally on June 23, 2009, and the physical copy in stores on August 25, 2009. The album was supposed to be Hamilton's major label debut and the first album distributed by a major record label for free download on Charles Hamilton's own website. There was also a physical copy of the album that would have to be purchased in stores that included a DVD of animated videos to help the listener get a better feel for the music. On August 17, 2009, Hamilton released This Perfect Life EP as promotion for the album.When the cover for This Perfect Life was released, Hamilton caused some controversy when the deceased producer, J Dilla, was named as executive producer. A handful of Dilla's closest associates through hip hop began speaking out against Hamilton's use of the name and its connection to his music. Hamilton later stated he wished to financially help J Dilla's mother, who had thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura, the same illness that took J Dilla's life. J Dilla's name was later removed from the album artwork due to legal reasons.After months of speculation, the album was never released as a result of Hamilton getting dropped from Interscope on September 19, 2009, for multiple reasons, including but not limited to his poor performance at a Penn State rap battle and his unapproved crediting of J Dilla. Manager Le'Roy Benros later explained why he felt Hamilton's career stalled by telling HitQuarters:

"I think things happened too fast. I don't think we were well prepared for what was given to us."
On September 24, 2009, the full album of This Perfect Life was released digitally by Hamilton himself and was leaked on various websites. Later that year, on December 28, 2009, Hamilton returned with his first mixtape after being released from Interscope, entitled Normalcy.


=== 2010–14: Independent projects ===
On March 25, 2010, Hamilton released his mixtape entitled The Binge Vol. 3: Charles Hamilton's Last Mixtape. Although he announced that The Binge Vol. 3 would be his last mixtape, Hamilton, along with fellow rapper B.o.B, released a video trailer to promote the song "Paperboy". In the video, B.o.B hinted that the two may be making a mixtape together. The single "Paperboy" ended up being released on May 21, 2010, and was produced by Woody. Also in March, Hamilton dedicated a song called "Choices (A Wave to Alex)" in honor of a friend who died after getting in the car with a drunk driver. Hamilton released a new single called "Gauchos" on May 4, 2010.On July 3, 2010, Hamilton released six mixtapes entitled Well This Isn't Awkward (Winner Takes All), Autumn Harvest, Gynophobia, Atlantis and A..., 10 Things I Hate About Me and The L Word II (INcomplete). That August, Hamilton released his compilation album originally to be his debut studio album for Interscope Records T.A.F.I.E.T.U (The Album For Interscope Executives To Understand), but due to Interscope's dislike for the tracks "North Pole" and "Laffy Taffy Outro", it was shelved by the label. On September 9, 2010, Hamilton released his extended play entitled For Your Locker.On September 23, 2011, one day after his discharge from Community Assessment and Treatment Services Rehab, Hamilton released two mixtapes, Gynophobia 2 and C.A.T.S. Can. Hamilton later publicly released his mixtape What the Hell Is Wrong with You?!; the project was written during his rehabilitation and later recorded following his discharge from rehab on September 22, 2011. The next year, Hamilton announced through Twitter hat he was releasing an independent album entitled Ill Doesn't Mean Classic. It would include the Eminem produced song "I Don't Care"; it was released as a mixtape on July 7, 2012. On July 30, 2012, Hamilton released a collaboration mixtape entitled Cinematic Hallucinations: The Bully And The Pet with rapper S.K.E. The Heistman, and later that year, on December 21, 2012, Hamilton released his extended play entitled The Come Down.On April 18, 2013, Hamilton's other shelved Interscope debut studio album Substance Abuse was leaked. A year later, on April 1, 2014, Hamilton released a collaboration album with rappers Spud Mack and S.K.E. Heistman entitled Hip Hop. On May 30, 2014, it was announced Hamilton allowed a friend to release his albums My Heart and The Zone though Hamilton would later claim that this was false, My Heart was originally supposed to be released as Charles Hamilton's debut studio album in 2010 while he was signed to NewCo Records but it was shelved by Hamilton.


==== Personal struggles and arrest ====
During an interview on July 27, 2010, Hamilton announced that he had checked himself into a psychiatric hospital. He stated: "My stay here is like identical to my stay in the industry. As far as being the new guy in here having to deal with politics and people trying to control you. The critics would have to be the doctors and the rounds. So you can say this is like an experiment to see if the industry is really like an asylum or if I was the one bugging. Some say the industry is like high school but its just like a [mental hospital]. All I wanted to do and still want to do is make music, he explained. It got to the point where I started talking in rhymes all the time, even in just regular conversations. And music just became me, so I thought it be a good idea if I checked into the hospital just to get my mind right."After being released on August 10, 2010, Hamilton discussed in an interview his stay at the psychiatric hospital and why upon filming of his release in a video why he was in a wheelchair, stating: "The reason Im in a wheelchair is because I have sharp pains since I was in the hospital and a little bit before, he said. I have sharp pains when Im walking and literally I want to collapse but I can't I have to continue to walk. So my right leg has been acting kinda funny. I still have a little bit of mobility, I can still stand up in the booth but I'd rather the mobility of my legs be jeopardized than my musicality be jeopardized at any given point of time."That December, Hamilton was arrested in Cleveland, Ohio after assaulting an officer. Hamilton would later post bail for $25,000 and was referred for psychiatric treatment. During a 2015 interview, Hamilton would go more into detail about what happened, saying that he "knew better than to punch a cop". Hamilton had just crashed his father's girlfriend's car, which he took without permission or a drivers license. Unharmed, he wandered to Quicken Loans Arena where he began playing what he says was an imaginary basketball with exiting Cavalier fans. "This cop walks over and was like, what are you doing?. I said, Basketball. He puts his arms out to guard me, so I crossed him and he slipped. His partner came over like, What's going on? He grabbed my arm and I punched him."Hamilton would later ultimately be diagnosed with bipolar disorder; during the time he was undiagnosed, he stated that "I just didn't trust anybody. I didn't leave my house, I just made music all the time. I was fighting depression – I shut myself in." Hamilton would also discuss how in his early career before he started his recovery, that he wanted to commit suicide: "I wanted to commit career suicide, physical suicide, spiritual suicide, I didn't care anymore."


=== 2014–2016: Signing to Republic and Hamilton, Charles ===

On October 16, 2014, Hamilton announced via his blog that he had finally started working on his debut studio album and that he would not be releasing any more free projects stating:

I got good news and bad news...
The good news is, I'm finally working on my debut retail album. It sounds amazing so far. Everyone is excited about it. The bad news is, no more free music. Odds are, ever. No loopholes. Which means, Vampire Sunlight might be the last free release, and The Evil Microchip will not drop. Not even on YouTube. Sorry, Markus. But a major thank you is in order for everyone who's helped me this far. Everyone from Boe and Dre to Jimmy Iovine. All the graphic designers who have made covers, all the fans who uploaded my music, everyone. Thank you. My digital revolution has taken the Galaxy by storm, and I'm proud of it. It's just time to take things to a higher level. Hopefully, yall will support me. I'm not gonna throw the fact you've heard all my secrets for free in your face. But honestly, I would personally appreciate it if you went out and supported whatever I put in stores. More news to come, but once again, no free music indefinitely. Hold your head, kids...
On January 17, 2015, Hamilton officially returned on social media after reactivating his Twitter account and creating his own Instagram page; on his first posted photo Hamilton would state "The hype is real. Hello again. #rapgame #letsdothis #hiphop". A week later, Hamilton performed a collaboration track with singer-songwriter Rita Ora, entitled "New York Raining". It was later announced that Hamilton had signed with record label/management company Turn First Records. On February 18, 2015, it was announced and confirmed that Hamilton had signed a second label deal with Republic Records; it was also announced that Hamilton's 1st single, "New York Raining" featuring Rita Ora, would be featured on the first soundtrack for Fox's high-rated TV series Empire. On March 18, 2015, "New York Raining" was released as Hamilton's first single since "Gauchos" in 2010.On April 15, 2015, Hamilton would announce he would be releasing an extended play before he would release his debut album. On May 19, 2015, Hamilton would announce that his extended play would be entitled The Black Box. On May 26, 2015, Hamilton would announce that he will also be releasing a mixtape entitled Kill the Reaper, but Hamilton would later shelve the project. In an interview with Mr. Wavvy released on July 8, 2015, Hamilton suggested that Lupe Fiasco (whom he had been opening for on tour at the time of the interview) would appear on a song with him in the near future. On August 19, 2015, Hamilton revealed the cover art and the release date for his upcoming EP The Black Box revealing it would be released on September 18, 2015. On September 17, 2015, Hamilton would reveal via Twitter that he had push the release date back for his upcoming EP The Black Box. On December 11, 2015, Hamilton would release his EP The Black Box.On October 28, 2016, Hamilton would announce that the release date for his upcoming major-label debut album Hamilton, Charles, would be released on December 2, 2016; it was ultimately pushed back a week and released on December 9, 2016.


=== 2017–present: The Pink Lavalamp reissue and return to independent music ===
To commemorate the tenth anniversary of his debut studio album, The Pink Lavalamp, Hamilton released a reissue of the album on CD and as a vinyl record on July 20, 2018.On June 15, 2019, Charles Hamilton released "Ralph Nader", his first live-action music video since "New York Raining". Hamilton has started a music label with longtime video collaborator Markus "MK" Allen.Hamilton collaborated with Massachusetts & Florida based producer/emcee Serious Truth on the EP Controversial, which was released on May 25, 2021. Controversial, containing no samples, is an original composition from front to back, with Serious Truth having played the synth, bass, electric piano and drum machine throughout the entire project. Writing and recording credits are split between Charles Hamilton and Serious Truth, with the latter also handling the cover artwork as well as audio engineering and post production aspects.


== Other ventures ==


=== Demevolist Music Group ===
Burke founded the record label Demevolist Music Group (DMG) in 2005, while he was attending Frederick Douglass Academy, he would later make Hamilton the president of the label. In 2008, the label signed to a distribution deal at Interscope, but in 2009 the label would be dropped by Interscope due to the controversy that was surrounding current president at the time Charles Hamilton.
Former artist/DJ's/producersThe Chosen Few
Charles Hamilton
J Means
Sha-Leik
Show TuFli
Yung Nate
Apryl Reardon
BagDad
DJ Skee
Fedel
I.S.A
Proven
Woody


== Musical style ==


=== Influences ===
Hamilton has frequently named American rapper Eminem as his biggest influence in his music. On May 6, 2009, during an issue of XXL, Eminem revealed he had worked with Hamilton in late 2007 and fellow rapper B.o.B., stating, "Charles Hamilton I've worked with a couple of years ago, toward the end of 2007. I just made the beat to a song, but, you know, Charles Hamilton is dope." On May 12, 2010, Hamilton penned a 1,000 word open dedication letter to Eminem.Hamilton has also named artists Incubus, N.E.R.D., Jay Z, Modest Mouse, Korn, Dr. Dre, Thelonious Monk, Aerosmith, 50 Cent, Marilyn Manson, The Alchemist, The Isley Brothers, Kanye West, Nine Inch Nails, Hi-Tek, DMX and Mase as other influences in his music, stating "I just love good music. Good music that tells a story."


=== Rapping technique ===
Hamilton has been known for his clear enunciation and his story-telling rhymes focusing on depression, hope, social injustice, drugs, Sega, women and religion. Hamilton is also known for carrying a concept over a series of albums, complex rhyme schemes, bending words so they rhyme, melody hooks, varied, humorous subject matter, multisyllabic rhymes, adding many rhymes to a bar, having complex rhythms, being able to freestyle rap over long lengthy periods of time and being a musical workaholic. In 2009 during an interview Hamilton would explain his rapping technique, According to Hamilton:

"I don't know how to read music, but I know how to sound music. So like, if I'm on beat, but not flowing, then I'm definitely easing in and out of the beat. I call it time mathematics, to be able to know how many words you can fit at a certain speed before your time is up."


=== Record production and songwriting ===
Hamilton also produces records and song writes for other artist as well, Hamilton is known for producing a majority of his own records. Hamilton is also known in his production style for his sampling of soul songs. In 2007 during an interview Hamilton talked about his sampling methods. According to Hamilton "When I sample, I'm not just doing it to sound good. I'm trying to tell a story. To convey an emotion. If I sampled it, there is a reason I sampled it. I believe that music is based on moments, and that there are some moments that people may have missed back in the day. They may have even missed it a year ago. When I sample, I'm giving the artist their respect, while simultaneously creating something new."


== Personal life ==
Hamilton is the cousin of rapper MC Lyte.On June 4, 2008, Hamilton discussed his admiration and his philosophy on the color pink stating "God is a woman, pink is the color of life, you give life with a man into the woman and pink is the inside of the woman's womb.During an interview on September 11, 2008, Hamilton discussed his past drug addiction with marijuana, heroin and psilocybin mushrooms.


== Discography ==

The Pink Lavalamp (2008)
This Perfect Life (2009) (shelved)
Hamilton, Charles (2016)
Hypergoth! (2022)
Electronic Christmas (2023)


== Filmography ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Charles Hamilton's channel on YouTubeAndre O’Neal Harrell (September 26, 1960 – May 7, 2020) was an American music executive and multimedia producer. In 1986, recently a rapper, he formed Uptown Records, soon a leader in R&B, rap, and their fusion, "hip hop soul" and "new jack swing." He gave Sean "Diddy" Combs his 1990 start in the industry, and later was Motown Records' CEO.


== Early life ==
Harrell was born in New York City borough the Bronx on September 26, 1960. His father, Bernie, worked at a produce market in the Bronx's Hunts Point section; his mother, Hattie, was a nurse's aide.
While a teenager, Harrell formed with Alonzo Brown, a friend from high school, a rap duo, Dr. Jeckyll & Mr. Hyde—Harrell as Jeckyll, Brown as Hyde—and reportedly achieved minor hit songs, "Genius Rap" in 1981 and "AM/PM" in 1984.Harrell graduated from Charles Evans Hughes High School in 1978. He attended Baruch College, transferred to Lehman College, and, aiming to be a newscaster, majored in communications and business management. Third-year, he withdrew and took work at a local radio station.


== Career ==
In 1983, Harrell met Russell Simmons, a co-founder of Def Jam Recordings. He went to work for Def Jam and within two years became vice-president and general manager. After a few years working at Def Jam, Harrell left and founded his own label called Uptown Records.Harrell is credited with having discovered and signed Sean "Puffy" Combs. In 1988, Mary J. Blige recorded an impromptu cover of Anita Baker's "Caught Up in the Rapture" at a recording booth in a local mall. Her mother's boyfriend at the time later played the cassette for Jeff Redd, a recording artist and A&R runner for Uptown Records. Redd sent it to Harrell, who met with Blige. In 1989, she was signed to the label and became the company's youngest and first female solo artist.In 1988, Harrell was offered a label deal MCA Music Entertainment Group. After he had multiple successful releases, in 1992, MCA offered Harrell a multimedia deal, which involved film and television productions. They developed the feature film Strictly Business and FOX's hit police drama series, New York Undercover, which aired from 1994 until 1998.Harrell renamed Uptown Records as Uptown Enterprises, and its records were featured in productions for Universal Pictures and Universal Television. In 1994, Harrell had a son with Wendy Credle, a music attorney. They named him Gianni Credle-Harrell.In 1995, Harrell was appointed CEO of Motown Records and remained there until 1997. He also hosted Champagne & Bubbles on Sunday nights from 6 to 9pm on Emmis Urban AC WRKS (98.7 Kiss FM)/New York. Harrell was the CEO of Harrell Records, which is distributed through Atlantic Records. He partnered with budding Atlanta-based production company L7 Entertainment for the release of their new artists Hamilton Park and Netta Brielle.Harrell was the Vice Chairman of Revolt, Diddy's multi-platform music network. On October 17, 2014, he was instrumental in launching the Revolt Music Conference in Miami, Florida, at the Fontainebleau Hotel. The event was attended by such entertainment figures as Guy Oseary, Russell Simmons, and L.A. Reid.


== Death ==
Harrell died on May 7, 2020, at his home in West Hollywood, California. He was 59, and news of his death was first announced on Instagram by D-Nice. According to Wendy Credle, Harrell's ex-partner, he had been suffering from heart problems in the time leading up to his death. At his funeral, held on May 23, among notable attendees were singers Mary J. Blige, Mariah Carey and record producer L.A. Reid.


== References ==

Biography of Andre Harrell Computer Tutorials Live


== External links ==
Profile of Andre Harrell and Uptown Records
Andre Harrell discography at Discogs
Twitter
Traugh, Susan M. (2010). Sean Combs. People in the News. Farmington Hills, MI: Lucent Books. ISBN 978-1-4205-0237-4.Kejuan Waliek Muchita (born May 21, 1974), better known by his stage name Havoc, is an American rapper and record producer. He was one half of the hip hop duo Mobb Deep with Prodigy.


== Biography ==
Havoc was born in Brooklyn and raised in the Queensbridge Houses. At a later age, Havoc found out his paternal grandfather was jazz musician Bill Dixon. In his teenage years, he shot a Def Jam employee in the belly by accident. He graduated from the High School of Art and Design in Manhattan, New York in 1992, where he met Prodigy. He is one half of the iconic hip hop duo Mobb Deep, and in addition to producing nearly the entire Mobb Deep catalogue, has also produced songs for MCs such as The Notorious B.I.G., Eminem, Nas, Raekwon, 50 Cent, 112, Method Man, Mariah Carey, Puff Daddy, LL Cool J, Rohff, Big Noyd, Lil Kim, Capone-N-Noreaga, Foxy Brown, Onyx, and his partner Prodigy on his solo work. In 2005, Mobb Deep recorded for fellow Queens rapper 50 Cent's record label G-Unit Records and left the label in 2009, in a mutually agreed-to release.Havoc is renowned as one of the most iconic figures in New York hip hop. Popular music magazine Complex ranked Havoc among the top hip hop producers of 1995 after The Infamous. Beattips.com ranked him as the 24th most influential beatmaker of all time citing his dual abilities of rapping and producing. Following The Infamous, he tweaked his skills and transitioned to a more atmospheric production style that incorporated samples from classical music, most notably visible on the 1996 album Hell on Earth. As a rapper, he is known for his hardcore lyricism and consistent flow. He also contributed background vocals and a verse on Black Moon's debut album Enta da Stage in 1993.
In July 2009, Havoc was featured alongside in J Dilla's music video for "24K Rap" off of the Jay Stay Paid album, the video was directed by Derek Pike. In 2010, Havoc produced a beat for Eminem that resulted in a song called "Untitled" which is a hidden track on Eminem's album Recovery and contributed to the iTunes bonus track to Raekwon's album Shaolin vs. Wu-Tang & Bad Meets Evil's Hell: The Sequel EP. He revealed that he plans to record a new Mobb Deep album with Nas. His third studio album 13 was released on May 7, 2013.
Havoc worked with Kavinsky on his 2013 album OutRun. He wrote the lyrics and sang the vocals for "Suburbia", the sixth track on the album. In 2016, Havoc helped produce "Real Friends" and "Famous", two tracks on Kanye West's album The Life of Pablo.His original productions have been featured in numerous commercially successful films, well known television series and popular video games, and he is a character in Def Jam: Fight For NY.
Havoc produced the New York Yankees official 2020 anthem, "Squad Up", that features verses from both Havoc and Method Man.


== Feuds ==


=== Prodigy ===
In July 2012, Havoc wrote a series of derogatory comments about Prodigy on Twitter, after Prodigy denied engaging in homosexual relationships in prison. At first, Havoc claimed that his Twitter account was hacked. However, he later confirmed that he wrote the tweets and expressed his frustrations with Prodigy in an interview with AllHipHop. He stated that Mobb Deep was on an "indefinite hiatus" until the duo worked out their differences. Havoc later released a diss track aimed at Prodigy, which was titled "Separated (Real from the Fake)". Prodigy did not respond to Havoc's song and even stated publicly that Mobb Deep would eventually reconcile. In March 2013, the duo announced that they had reconciled and were going on tour.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===
2007: The Kush
2009: Hidden Files
2013: 13
2014: 13 Reloaded


=== Collaboration albums ===
2016: The Silent Partner (with The Alchemist)
2020: In the Name of Prodigy (with Flee Lord)
2021: Extreme Measures (with Dark Lo)
2021: Future of the Streets (Deluxe Edition) (with Nyce da Future)
2021: Wreckage Manner (with Styles P)


=== Mixtapes ===
2007: The One and Only
2009: From Now On (The Mixtape)


=== Instrumental albums ===
2013: Beats Collection
2013: Beats Collection 2


=== Extended plays ===
2021: Future of the Streets (with Nyce da Future)


=== Singles ===
2007: "I'm the Boss"
2007: "Be There"
2009: "Watch Me" (Feat. Ricky Blaze)
2009: "Heart of the Grind"
2009: "H Is Back"
2009: "Always Have a Choice"
2010: "If You Love Me" (Feat. Sheek Louch, Joell Ortiz & Cassidy)
2012: "Same Shit, Different Day"
2012: "Separated (Real from the Fake)" (Feat. Ferg Brim)
2013: "Gritty" (Instrumental)
2013: "Tell Me to My Face" (Feat. Royce da 5'9")
2013: "Gone"
2013: "Life We Chose" (Feat. Lloyd Banks)
2013: "Life We Chose" (Remix) (Feat. Prodigy, Lloyd Banks)


=== Featured ===
2013: "Suburbia" on OutRun by Kavinsky


== Video game appearances ==
Havoc is a playable character in the video game Def Jam: Fight for NY.


== References ==


== External links ==
MTV bio
September 2007 InterviewEmile Haynie (born July 13, 1980), often credited simply as Emile, is an American record producer. Born and raised in Buffalo, New York, his range of production includes alternative rock, hip hop, indie and pop music. Haynie has worked with several prominent artists in the music industry including Kanye West, Kid Cudi, Eminem, Lana Del Rey, Bruno Mars, Linkin Park, FKA Twigs, Florence Welch and Camila Cabello, among others. Additionally, Haynie received two Grammy Awards for his work with English singer Adele, namely Album of the Year for the diamond certified 25 as well as Record of the Year for "Hello".


== Biography ==


=== 2003–2008: Early life and career beginnings ===
Emile Haynie is a native of Buffalo, New York. He started primarily as a sample-driven hip-hop producer and got his first big break after handing off a beat CD to now-deceased Detroit rapper Proof. He then began producing for various members of Eminem’s Detroit camp, as well as New York City rappers Raekwon, Cormega, and C-Rayz Walz. He relocated to New York City and got his start as a hip hop producer in the early 2000s, collaborating with rappers Obie Trice, Ghostface Killah, The Roots, Cormega, M.O.P., Rhymefest, and AZ. His career grew and, by the second half of 2000's first decade, he had worked with Ice Cube, Slaughterhouse, Eminem, Kanye West and Kid Cudi.


=== 2008–2010: Dream On era ===
In 2007, Haynie, along with record producer Patrick “Plain Pat” Reynolds, began co-managing the career of then-up-and-coming musician Kid Cudi. The two would go on to executive produce Cudi’s debut mixtape A Kid Named Cudi (2008). In late 2008, Haynie, Plain Pat and Kid Cudi launched their record label, Dream On, in partnership with Kanye West's GOOD Music and Universal Motown. Haynie remixed Michael Jackson's 1972 song, "Maria (You Were the Only One)", for the 2009 album Michael Jackson: The Remix Suite. In February 2011 Kid Cudi announced Dream On had been dissolved. Cudi stated to Complex magazine that they were still on good terms: "I wanted to try something new, and I wanted to take control of things myself.[...] There’s no hard feelings." The label released Kid Cudi's albums, Man on the Moon: The End of Day (2009) and Man on the Moon II: The Legend of Mr. Rager (2010).


=== 2010–2014: Mainstream hits ===
Haynie was nominated for the 2010 Grammy Award for Album of the Year for Eminem's Recovery. He co-produced Kanye West's 2010 single, "Runaway", and expanded into pop and indie music, working with Lana Del Rey, Bruno Mars and Fun. Haynie produced Lana Del Rey's 2012 album, Born to Die, which debuted on the Billboard 200 chart at number two, and at number one in Britain, Germany, Ireland, Switzerland and Austria, respectively. Alongside Jeff Bhasker, Haynie also produced Fun's second album Some Nights (2012). Haynie also co-wrote Lady Antebellum's 2013's single, "Compass".


=== 2015–present: We Fall ===

On January 19, 2015, Haynie announced he would be releasing his debut studio album, titled We Fall, featuring guest appearances from Andrew Wyatt, Brian Wilson, Rufus Wainwright, Lana Del Rey, Charlotte Gainsbourg, Sampha, Devonte Hynes, Nate Ruess, Colin Blunstone, Lykke Li, Romy Madley Croft, Randy Newman, Father John Misty and Julia Holter. The album, which was recorded over the course of six months in Los Angeles' Chateau Marmont, was made available for pre-order the following day and was revealed to be released February 23, 2015, under Interscope Records.In January 2020, Hipgnosis Songs Fund confirmed the acquisition of Haynie’s music catalog. Details of the acquisition were first revealed in the Merck Mercuriadis-led, UK-based company’s interim report, published the month prior. Hipgnosis acquired 100% of Haynie’s worldwide copyrights, including publishing and writer share, as well as  producer royalty income streams, of his catalog comprising 122 songs.


== Awards and nominations ==


=== Grammy Awards ===


== Personal life ==
Haynie works out of his studio in the New York City neighborhood of Chelsea.


== Legacy ==
In 2020, Canadian music executive Merck Mercuriadis, founder of Hipgnosis Songs Fund, called Haynie “one of the most influential producers of the last decade and with Lana Del Rey, Kid Cudi, Eminem, Bruno Mars, Fun and many others he has made important records that have inspired so many other great creators.”


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===


== Production discography ==


=== Singles produced ===


== Filmography ==
A Man Named Scott (2021) - Himself


== References ==


== External links ==
Emile Haynie at AllMusic


== Further reading ==
How Emile Haynie Went From Hustling Beat CDs To Making Hits. The Fader. Retrieved April 25, 2018Dwight Arrington Myers (May 24, 1967 – November 8, 2011), known professionally as Heavy D, was a Jamaican-born American rapper, record producer, and actor. Myers was the leader of Heavy D & the Boyz, a group that included dancers/hype men G-Whiz (Glen Parrish) and "Trouble" T. Roy (Troy Dixon), as well as DJ and producer Eddie F (Edward Ferrell). The group maintained a sizeable audience in the United States through most of the 1990s. The five albums the group released included production mainly by Teddy Riley, Marley Marl, DJ Premier, Myers's cousin Pete Rock, and "in-house" beatmaker Eddie F. Myers also released four solo albums and discovered Soul for Real and Monifah.


== Early life ==
Dwight Arrington Myers was born on May 24, 1967, in Mandeville, Manchester, Jamaica, the son of nurse Eulahlee Lee and machine technician Clifford Vincent Myers. In the early 1970s, his family moved to Mount Vernon, New York, where he was raised. In an interview, his mother stated that he spent most of his childhood hanging out with his brother Floyd and his friend Mo.


== Career ==
Heavy D & the Boyz were the first group signed to Uptown Records, with Heavy D as the frontman and only rapper. Eddie F was his business partner in the group, DJ, and one of the producers. The other two members, T-Roy and G-Wiz were the dancers. Their debut, Living Large, was released in 1987. The album was a commercial success; Big Tyme was a breakthrough that included four hits. "Trouble T. Roy" died at age 22 in a fall on July 15, 1990, in Indianapolis. Dixon's death led to a tribute on the follow-up platinum album, Peaceful Journey. Pete Rock & CL Smooth created a tribute to Trouble T. Roy called "They Reminisce Over You (T.R.O.Y.)" which is regarded as a hip hop classic.In 1989, Heavy D performed a guest rap on Janet Jackson's hit single "Alright", an early example of rap appearances on pop songs. It was also the highest peaking song which he had performed on in the Billboard Hot 100. In 1992 he appeared on Michael Jackson's single "Jam", and also gained a higher profile by singing the theme song for the television program In Living Color and also MADtv. Heavy D then began focusing on his acting, appearing in various television shows before returning to the music charts with Nuttin' But Love. After appearing in the off-Broadway play Riff Raff at Circle Repertory Company, Heavy D returned to recording with the hit Waterbed Hev. In 1997, Heavy D collaborated with B.B. King on his duets album Deuces Wild, rapping in the song "Keep It Coming". Heavy D was referred to in the song "Juicy" by the Notorious B.I.G., and appeared in his music video for "One More Chance".
While still an artist at Uptown Records, Myers was instrumental in convincing Andre Harrell to originally hire Sean "Diddy" Combs for his first music business gig as an intern. He became the president of Uptown Records. During this time, Myers also developed the boy band Soul for Real, and was the executive producer and principal writer of several songs on the group's breakout album, Candy Rain. He later became senior vice president at Universal Music. As an actor, Heavy D is perhaps best known for his role in the 1999 drama film The Cider House Rules, where he plays a migrant worker. He fathered a daughter in 2000 with chef Antonia Lofaso, a contestant on the fourth season of Top Chef.


== Death ==
Heavy D's final live performance was with Eddie F at the 2011 BET Hip Hop Awards on October 11, 2011, their first live televised performance together in 15 years. Myers died on November 8, 2011, in Los Angeles, California, at the age of 44. He collapsed outside his home in Beverly Hills, California, and was taken to Cedars-Sinai Medical Center. His death was initially thought to be connected to pneumonia. An autopsy report, released on December 27, 2011, stated that the cause of death was a pulmonary embolism (PE) caused by a blood clot in a leg. He had also suffered from heart disease. Craig Harvey, chief of the Los Angeles County Department of Coroner, said that the blood clot that resulted in the PE was "most likely formed during an extended airplane ride". Heavy D had recently returned from a trip to Cardiff, Wales, United Kingdom, where he performed at a Michael Jackson tribute concert.Shortly after his death, MC Hammer and others paid tribute to Heavy D on Twitter. Hammer tweeted that, "We had a lot of great times touring together. He had a heart of gold. He was a part of what's good about the world." His funeral was held at Grace Baptist Church in his hometown of Mount Vernon, New York.  He was buried in Hartsdale, New York.


== Discography ==

With Heavy D and The BoyzLiving Large (1987)
Big Tyme (1989)
Peaceful Journey (1991)
Blue Funk (1993)
Nuttin' but Love (1994)Solo albumsWaterbed Hev (1997)
Heavy (1999)
Vibes (2008)
Love Opus (2011)


== Filmography ==


=== Film ===


=== Television ===


== Sampling ==
"We Got Our Own Thang"  – James Brown "Funky President", James Brown "My Thang", CJ & Co "We Got Our Own Thing"
"You A'int Heard Nuttin' Yet"  – James Brown "It's a Man's Man's World", Lyn Collins "Think", Grover Washington, Jr. "Mr. Magic"
"More Bounce"  – Parliament, "Tear the Roof Off the Sucker (We Want the Funk)", Zapp "More Bounce to the Ounce"
"Somebody for Me" – Big Daddy Kane, "Word to the Motherland"
"Here We Go Again Y'all"  – JB's, "Pass the Peas"
"A Better Land"  – Main Ingredient, "Everybody Plays the Fool"


== References ==


== External links ==
Heavy D on Facebook
Heavy D at IMDb
Heavy D on Twitter 
Heavy D at Find A GraveDurrell Mohammad (born May 3, 1979), better known by his stage name Hell Rell, is an American rapper.


== Career ==
In 2007, he signed with Koch Records and began working on his debut album, For the Hell of It. The album reached No. 5 on both the Billboard Top Independent Albums and Top Rap Albums chart, and No. 10 on the Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums.


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===
2007: For the Hell of It
2008: Black Mask, Black Gloves
2009: Get in Line or Get Lined Up
2009: Hard as Hell
2019: "Forgive but Never Forget"


=== Other albums ===
2007: Eat with Me or Eat a Box of Bullets
2009: Live from Hell
2009: Hell Up in the Bronx


=== Compilation albums ===
2009: Hell Rell Hosts: Straight Outta Harlem (The Ultimate Uptown Collection)


=== Collaboration mixtapes ===
2007: Double Trouble (with J.R. Writer)
2007: Year of the Gun (with 40 Cal.)
2011: Gun Clap (with J.R. Writer)
2011: Guilty by Association (with J. Stalin & Lord Geez)
2012: Bronx Tales (with Yung JB)


=== Solo mixtapes ===
2004: Fire & Ice (Mixed by DJ Sickamore)
2005: Streets Wanna Know
2006: New Gun in Town
2008: Top Gunna: The Ruga Edition
2009: The Extermination: Return to the Grind
2010: Bullpen Therapy
2010: You need People like Me: The Return of the Black Mask
2010: Black Masks Black Gloves: Ruga Edition
2011: Million Dollar Dreams Federal Nightmares
2011: Us never Them - The Mixtape
2011: The Black Cloud
2012: Not Guilty
2013: Streets Wanna Know 2: Valentines Day Massacre
2013: The Meyer Lansky Project
2014: Walking Brick
2015: O.N.Y.G. (Mixed by DJ Sam Hoody)
2017: The Scale


=== Guest appearances ===
Mixtape Album by Hell Rell and Glaze


== References ==


== External links ==
Hell Rell at Billboard
Hell Rell on Myspace
Hell Rell interview with hiphopgame.com Archived October 20, 2007, at the Wayback Machine
Hell Rell Interview, Dec 30, 2009Samuel Thompson Herring (born April 13, 1984), known professionally as Samuel T. Herring and Hemlock Ernst, is an American singer and rapper from Baltimore, Maryland, best known for being the frontman of the synth-pop band Future Islands. He was also a member of Art Lord & the Self-Portraits, The Snails, and Trouble Knows Me.


== Early life ==
Born in Carteret County, North Carolina, Herring grew up in Newport and Morehead City. He began rapping at age 14 at freestyle battles and cyphers. In 2002, he enrolled at East Carolina University. Herring is a keen soccer fan and an avid supporter of Everton F.C.


== Career ==
In 2003, while attending East Carolina University, Herring and other colleagues started the performance art band Art Lord & the Self-Portraits, which lasted until 2005. Some of its former members started Future Islands in 2006, and the band relocated to Baltimore, Maryland in 2008. In 2013, Herring took a break from the band's touring in order to spend more time on his solo rap project, writing more, and doing more shows.Parallel to Future Islands, Herring continued rapping either solo, under the moniker Hemlock Ernst, or with his brother as Flesh Epic. Hemlock was his original writing name on an on-line music board when he was in the 9th grade, from a poem he wrote about Socrates taking the hemlock poison. Ernst comes from his character in Art Lord & the Self-Portraits who was named Locke Ernst-Frost: a reference to John Locke the religious poet, Max Ernst, the artist and Robert Frost, the American poet.In 2015, Hemlock Ernst teamed up with producer Madlib for a new rap project called Trouble Knows Me. Entirely produced by Madlib, the self-titled EP was released via Madlib Invazion on September 1, 2015. It was pre-sold at Madlib's show at The Mid in Chicago, Illinois on July 17, 2015, as well as Rappcats' website and a Rappcats popup shop. On March 24, 2016, British musician Four Tet sat in for Benji B on BBC Radio 1 and played "Rings in the Coffee", an unreleased track by Trouble Knows Me.On October 25, 2019, he released a rap album, Back at the House,  via Ruby Yacht under the moniker Hemlock Ernst. It was entirely produced by Kenny Segal.In June 2022, Deadline announced Herring had joined the cast of the Apple+ series The Changeling Season 1 of the show premiered in September 2023, in which Herring made his acting debut as William Wheeler.
On September 29, 2023 the Hemlock Ernst album The Fall Collection was released on the Alpha Pup label. Produced by Height Keech.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===
Back at the House (2019) (with Kenny Segal, as Hemlock Ernst & Kenny Segal)


=== EPs ===
Trouble Knows Me (2015) (with Madlib, as Trouble Knows Me)


=== Singles ===
"Down" (2019) (with Kenny Segal, as Hemlock Ernst & Kenny Segal)


=== Guest appearances as Samuel T. Herring ===
Double Dagger — "The Lie/The Truth" from More (2009)
Microkingdom — "I'm on Fire" (2012)
Beth Jeans Houghton — "Pelican Canyon" (2014)
Du Blonde — "Mind Is on My Mind" from Welcome Back to Milk (2015)
Gangrene — "Play It Cool" from Welcome to Los Santos (2015)
BadBadNotGood — "Time Moves Slow" from IV (2016)
Clams Casino — "Ghost in a Kiss" from 32 Levels (2016)
Celebration — "Paper Trails" from Wounded Healer (2017)
BadBadNotGood — "I Don't Know" (2017)
Nina Kinert — "Chapped Lips" from Romantic (2018)
DJ Shadow — "Our Pathetic Age" from Our Pathetic Age (2019)
PBDY — "Tears or Rain" from Careworn (2019)
Chaunter — "Lightning Games" from Dream Dynamics (2019)
Kennebec — "Leaving the Canyons" (2022)
billy woods & Kenny Segal — "Facetime" (2023)


=== Guest appearances as Hemlock Ernst ===
Rapdragons — "Gotta Go" from Featuring Baltimore (2010)
Scallops Hotel — "Lavender Chunk" from Plain Speaking (2015)
83cutlass — "Wicked Kingdom" (2015)
Milo — "Souvenir" from So the Flies Don't Come (2015)
Busdriver — "Ministry of the Torture Couch" from Thumbs (2015)
Cavanaugh — "Typecast" and "Lemons" from Time and Materials (2015)
Curse ov Dialect — "Twisted Strangers" from Twisted Strangers (2016)
Open Mike Eagle & Paul White — "Protectors of the Heat" from Hella Personal Film Festival (2016)
Words Hurt — "This Is Where I Leave You" (2016)
Boy Legs — "Something Out There" from Pinball Museum (2016)
Watercolor Warewolf — "Wwhat U Wwaitin 4" from AM Nights: 92.3 the Beast (2016)
Charge It to the Game — "Bite Me" from Urban Hall of Fame (2016)
JPEGMafia — "Llama Mind" from The 2nd Amendment (2016)
Bond St. District — "Terror Era" from A Church on Vulcan (2016)
Drew Scott — "Porcelain" and "Dead Cupid" from Ill Vessel (2017)
Passage — "Krang (Total Reduction Remix)" from Worked On (2017)
Billy Woods — "Illegal Tints" (2017)
Busdriver — "Tiny Infinities" from Electricity Is on Our Side (2018)
Mister and Curt Cataract — "Approaching Land" from Approaching Land (2019)
Blockhead — "Blue Veil" from Free Sweatpants (2019)
R.A.P. Ferreira - "Export The Conundrum" from the truly ancient and original lefthanded styles of the hoodwinkers and penny pinchers (2019)


== References ==


== External links ==
Samuel T. Herring discography at DiscogsCharles Edward Hugo (born February 24, 1974) is an American record producer and multi-instrumentalist. Alongside close colleague Pharrell Williams, he formed the hip hop and R&B production duo the Neptunes in 1992, with whom he's produced numerous hit records for various artists. He is also a member of the band N.E.R.D., alongside Williams and Shay Haley, and co-founded the now-defunct record label Star Trak Entertainment with Williams in 2001. In contrast to Williams, Hugo typically does not perform on records.


== Early Life ==
Charles Edward Hugo was born February 24, 1979, in Portsmouth, Virginia to a Filipino-American family. His mother was a lab technician and his father served in the United States Navy. His exploration of music included recording mixtapes in his home using a boombox, and writing a paper about Robert Moog after learning about synthesizers from the news, which sparked an interest in electronic musical equipment. He later joined his school band, playing the saxophone, through which he met Pharrell Williams, with whom he began producing music. They formed The Neptunes, and in 1992,  upon entering a local talent contest, they were discovered by Teddy Riley, whose studio was close to their school. Williams introduced Hugo to Hayley, with whom they formed the group N.E.R.D in 1999. During high school Hugo worked as a professional DJ, performing at local church events, and he and Williams also met and begin collaborating with brothers Pusha T and No Malice of Clipse, recording in Hugo's bedroom in his parents' attic.


== Career ==

Through working with Riley, the Neptunes wrote Wreckx-n-Effect's 1992 song "Rump Shaker" while still in school. They also worked with Riley's group Blackstreet, co-writing the single "Tonight's the Night" from their self-titled debut album.The Neptunes continued their production work, contributing to projects by New York City-based rapper Noreaga, Ol' Dirty Bastard, and Kelis for whom they would entirely produce her debut studio album, Kaleidoscope in 1999, and her album Wanderland two years later.  Hugo met Jay-Z during a studio session for his second studio album, In My Lifetime, Vol. 1 (1997), performing saxophone on the album's second single "The City Is Mine", with the Neptunes going on to produce a number of tracks for Jay-Z. The Neptunes also produced hip hop duo Clipse's album, Exclusive Audio Footage in 1999, which went unreleased until 2022.In 2001, the Neptunes founded the label Star Trak Entertainment, on which both the Neptunes and N.E.R.D would release the entirety of their projects until the label's dissolution in 2014. The same year, N.E.R.D. released their debut studio album, In Search of..., experimenting with more live instrumentation in comparison to the Neptunes' previous output. Soon after, the Neptunes gained their first worldwide hit, producing Britney Spears' single, "I'm a Slave 4 U", and wrote and produced NSYNC's final single, "Girlfriend". After the breakup of NSYNC, they continued to work with group member Justin Timberlake, writing and producing most of his debut solo album, Justified.In 2003, Hugo co-wrote and co-produced all songs on Kenna's debut album New Sacred Cow, and the Neptunes released a compilation album, Clones, featuring songs and remixes from various Star Trak artists. At the 2004 Grammy Awards, they won awards for "Best Pop Vocal Album" for their work on Justified, and "Producer of the Year". Continuing his work with Kenna, Hugo co-produced all tracks on his next three projects: The Black Goodbye EP (2007), Make Sure They See My Face (2007), and Land 2 Air Chronicles II: Imitation Is Suicide Chapter 1 (2013). Hugo's notable solo production work includes collaborations with Ashlee Simpson,  JoJo, E-40,  The Internet, and BROCKHAMPTON. He has also done remixes for Jesse McCartney, Kings of Leon, and St. Vincent. 
Hugo worked with Baltimore producer and DJ Daniel Biltmore under the name "MSSL CMMND", releasing mixtapes, original productions, and remixes of artists including Rhye,  Iamsu!. Under the moniker Yardnoise, he produced six tracks on the companion album to the film  Manny (2014), by directors Ryan Moore and Leon Gast, which chronicled the early life and career of Filipino boxer Manny Pacquiao.Hugo and Pharrell Williams were inducted into the Songwriters Hall of Fame as a part of the 2020 class.


== Discography ==

With N.E.R.D.In Search of... (2002)
Fly or Die (2004)
Seeing Sounds (2008)
Nothing (2010)
No One Ever Really Dies (2017)With the NeptunesClones (2003)


== Personal life ==
Hugo has three children, born in 1998, 2000, and 2014.


== See also ==
The Neptunes production discography


== References ==


== External links ==
Chad Hugo on TwitterWendell Timothy Fite, also known as DJ Hurricane (born January 12, 1965) is an American hip hop DJ, producer and rapper. He is best known for his work with the Beastie Boys. He was a member of the groups Solo Sounds and The Afros and recorded three solo albums, featuring many well-known artists such as Xzibit, Public Enemy, Kool G Rap, Black Thought, Papoose and Talib Kweli.


== Career ==
One of New York's premier hip-hop artists on the turntables, DJ Hurricane fostered his skills alongside Run D.M.C. in the Hollis, Queens area of New York City. His first hip-hop experience was with Davy Dmx the first hip-hop DJ from Hollis. Hurricane became his rapper for The Solo Sounds crew who performed at block parties and Russell Simmons promotion events. He was also a member of the Hollis Crew. Hurricane began rhyming at the age of 13, Jam Master Jay and Hurricane were best friends in school.When Jam Master Jay got the job to DJ for Run D.M.C. he asked Hurricane to come on tour. While serving as a bodyguard on the 1986 Raising Hell tour, he became friends with the Beastie Boys, who were the tour's opening act. Hurricane and Davy DMX collaborated and made Davy's Ride album in 1987. The next big tour The Together Forever Tour, with Run-DMC, The Beastie Boys and Davy DMX, saw Hurricane perform with all three acts every night. Hurricane later formed the Hollis, Queens-based novelty group The Afros along with DJ Kippy-O and Kool Tee.  The Afros were the first group signed to Jam Master Jay's JMJ Records, releasing the single "Feel It" and the album Kickin' Afrolistics in 1990.  They made cameos in various rap music videos and concerts before disbanding.When the Beastie Boys were stuck without a DJ they asked Hurricane to sit in and he did them a favor. It was not long before the Beasties returned the favor and offered Hurricane an opportunity to be their exclusive DJ. That gig would last for 13 years. In 1993, along with the Beastie Boys, he contributed the track "It's The New Style" to the AIDS-benefit album No Alternative produced by the Red Hot Organization. As the Beasties rose in fame with each successive album in the 1990s, Hurricane simultaneously reveled in the spotlight, releasing his first solo album in 1995 on Grand Royal, titled The Hurra (guest artists include the Beastie Boys, MC Breed, and Sen Dog). The single "Stick 'em Up" was the first single on the CB4 movie 
soundtrack. Hurricane started his own production company, Don't Sleep Productions in 1999. DJ Hurricane also produced songs for MC Breed album funkdafied one of the songs featured George Clinton.
After having parted ways with the Beasties prior to their album Hello Nasty in 1998, Hurricane did co-write the song "Three MC'S and One DJ" for The Beastie Boys. Hurricane released his second album Severe Damage on Wiija Records in the UK. It was only released in the UK and Asia. Hurricane's third solo album via TVT, Don't Sleep, which found him much more conceptually collected and with a broad scope of guest artists, including Kool G Rap, Xzibit, Scott Weiland, Public Enemy, Rah Digga, Talib Kweli, Pharoahe Monch, Ad-Rock, Black Thought, Big Gipp, Hittman among others. Hurricane produced the entire album. The track "Come Get It" featured Flipmode Squad peaked at No. 73 of Billboard Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs.


== Discography ==


=== Solo ===


==== 1995 – The Hurra ====


==== 1997 – Severe Damage ====


==== 2000 – Don't Sleep ====

Song "Come Get It" appeared in Whiteboys (Original Motion Picture Soundtrack)
Song "We Will Rock You" appeared in Ready To Rumble (Soundtrack)


=== With Beastie Boys ===


== References ==


== External links ==
DJ Hurricane at IMDb
DJ Hurricane on FacebookIsis Naija Gaston (born January 1, 2000), known professionally as Ice Spice, is an American rapper. Born and raised in the Bronx in New York City, she embarked on her musical career in 2021 after meeting American record producer RiotUSA.
Ice Spice first gained major recognition in late 2022 with her song "Munch (Feelin' U)", which achieved viral popularity on TikTok. She followed it with "Bikini Bottom" and "In Ha Mood", leading up to her debut EP, Like..? (2023). She achieved her first entry on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart with the Lil Tjay collaboration "Gangsta Boo". She rose to prominence with the collaborations "Boy's a Liar Pt. 2" (with PinkPantheress), "Princess Diana" (with Nicki Minaj), "Karma" (with Taylor Swift), and "Barbie World" (with Minaj and Aqua), all of which reached the top 10 of the Hot 100, making Ice Spice the first artist to garner four Hot 100 top-10 singles in 2023. 
Music journalists have noted Ice Spice's relaxed rapping style. In 2023, Time described her as a "breakout star". Publications such as The New York Times and Billboard have dubbed her "rap's new princess". She has been honored with the MTV Video Music Award for Best New Artist, and the Impact Award from the BMI R&B/Hip-Hop Awards.


== Early life and education ==
Isis Naija Gaston was born on January 1, 2000, in the Bronx, New York City, where she was raised in the Fordham Road neighborhood. She is the oldest of five siblings. Her father, Joseph Gaston, who was a former underground rapper, is African-American, while her mother, Charina Almanzar, who  worked at a car dealership and gave birth to Gaston at age 17, is Dominican. The two first met at a McDonald's and divorced when Gaston was two years old.Because her parents were frequently busy working, she spent much of her childhood with her grandparents and cousins. She went to school in the Bronx until she was sent to Sacred Heart High School, a Catholic high school in Yonkers. At age seven, she took a liking to hip hop after listening to rappers like Lil' Kim, Nicki Minaj, and others and wrote poetry and freestyle raps from elementary school to high school. In an interview with Billboard, Ice explained that she grew up listening to the likes of Jay-Z, 50 Cent and Wu-Tang Clan because of her father's rap background. She would type out lyrics in the Notes app of her iPhone, listening to hip-hop instrumentals and rapping out loud to them. "When I saw Nicki [Minaj], I was so mesmerized," Ice Spice explained. "She's the first female rapper that I seen. And ever since then, I was kinda set on what I wanted to be." She chose Ice Spice as her stage name while she was a freshman in high school.Ice Spice graduated from Sacred Heart High in 2018 and attended State University of New York at Purchase, where she was a defensive specialist on the school's volleyball team and studied biology. In seven matches, she had two kills and nine digs in the 2018 season.Around her sophomore year, Ice Spice dropped out of SUNY Purchase, explaining that she did not believe the school was the right fit for her and attributing her "strenuous commute" for leaving college.As the eldest sister of her four siblings, Ice Spice was their de facto protector. She supported herself as a cashier at Wendy's and The Gap.


== Career ==


=== 2021–2022: Career beginnings ===
Ice Spice started rapping in 2021 after meeting with a record producer, RiotUSA, while she was attending State University of New York at Purchase. He produced her debut song, "Bully Freestyle", released in March 2021 after a video of Ice Spice doing the "Buss It" challenge went viral on Twitter. Her song "Name of Love" gained traction on SoundCloud, which led to her becoming popular on Instagram.


=== 2022–present: Breakthrough with Like…? ===
On August 10, 2022, Ice Spice released her song "Munch (Feelin' U)", accompanied with a video distributed by WorldStarHipHop, as the lead single from her then-untitled debut EP, Like..?. The song gained popularity after getting support from Drake, who played the song on his Sirius XM radio station, Sound 42. It subsequently went viral on Twitter and TikTok, and charted on Billboard's Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs and Bubbling Under Hot 100 charts. In September 2022, Ice Spice appeared as a featured artist on the song "One Time" by B-Lovee. Later that month, she signed a record deal with 10K Projects and Capitol Records. On October 28, she released the single "Bikini Bottom". Ice Spice's debut EP, Like..?, was released on January 20, 2023, and included the singles "Munch (Feelin' U)", "Bikini Bottom", and "In Ha Mood".
In February 2023, Ice Spice collaborated with Lil Tjay on the tribute single "Gangsta Boo" to the late rapper of the same name, which became her first song on the Billboard Hot 100 at No. 82. On February 3, 2023, the remix of singer PinkPantheress's song, "Boy's a Liar Pt. 2" featuring Ice Spice and the corresponding music video were released. The song peaked at No. 3 on the Billboard Hot 100, the highest charting position for either artist at the time. In April 2023, she released the remix of "Princess Diana" with Nicki Minaj. The song peaked at number four on the Hot 100, earning Ice Spice her second top-ten hit on the chart and the twenty second top-ten hit for Minaj. On May 24, 2023, a remix of Taylor Swift's "Karma" featuring Ice Spice, was announced for release on May 26, 2023. The remix is a bonus track on the special editions of Swift's tenth studio album, Midnights (2022). A music video for the remix, featuring Swift and Ice Spice, was released on May 27. Pitchfork described 2023 as the breakout year of Ice Spice. "Karma" peaked at number two on the Hot 100, making Ice Spice the artist with the most Hot 100 top-five singles in 2023. The deluxe version of Like..?, featuring five new tracks, was released on July 21, 2023.


== Artistry ==


=== Musical and lyrical style ===
Ice Spice's music is primarily Bronx drill. Her name came from a "finsta" (fake Instagram account) she made at age 14. She has said she writes all her own lyrics, though she does not consider herself as a lyricist. She explained that she prefers her lyrics to be "super simple" and "digestible".


=== Influences ===
In a 2022 feature for Rolling Stone titled "My Life in 10 Songs", Ice Spice cited Coldplay's "Yellow" and the 1975's "Sex": "When I was 13 or 14, I was playing [The 1975] all the time. It was my shit, I think it's because they're from Europe and he [Matty Healy] has that accent. It was a thing for me."Ice Spice was first inspired to start rapping by Sheff G and Pop Smoke, and has listed Lil' Kim, Nicki Minaj, Cardi B, Foxy Brown, and Remy Ma as musical influences due to their New York roots. She has also called Erykah Badu, Rihanna, Taylor Swift, and Lauryn Hill inspirations because of their "graceful angelic vibe of timeless beauty".


== Personal life ==
Ice Spice is bisexual. She relocated to New Jersey following her career breakthrough, as she found that she had become too recognizable in her hometown of the Bronx.


== Discography ==

Extended plays

Like..? (2023)


== Tours ==
Supporting

Doja Cat – The Scarlet Tour (2023)


== Awards and nominations ==


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website 
Ice Spice on Facebook
Ice Spice on SoundCloudWilliam Braunstein (born July 14, 1972), known by his stage name Ill Bill, is an American rapper and record producer from Brooklyn, New York City. Having gained fame in the underground hip hop group Non Phixion, Ill Bill is known for his diverse lyrics and as the producer, founder and CEO of Uncle Howie Records. His brother Ron is rapper and producer Necro.


== Collaboration work/groups ==


=== Non Phixion ===
In late 1994, MC Serch took his protégé Sabac Red and teamed him up with DJ Eclipse and Ill Bill, thereby creating the group known as Non Phixion. Within six months Goretex, a childhood friend of Ill Bill, had joined the crew after freestyling for MC Serch. Non Phixion released a studio album titled The Future is Now in 2002, numerous singles and two compilations albums. Much of the production work was done by Necro.


=== Circle of Tyrants ===
Circle of Tyrants was an underground hip hop group consisting of Necro, Ill Bill, Mr Hyde and Goretex. The group released a self-titled studio album in 2005 on Necro's Psycho-Logical-Records. Necro produced all tracks on the album. The four members often collaborated on each other's solo projects.


=== La Coka Nostra ===
La Coka Nostra was founded in 2005 as a loose collective of artists connected through Danny Boy of House of Pain. Having taken time off from rap after the break-up of House of Pain, Danny Boy took to working in video production and fashion as well as mentoring other artists. He met Slaine in Boston and, impressed with his writing, brought him to L.A. to record some tracks. Eventually it turned into more of a group effort including the former members of House of Pain and Ill Bill. It was announced that Everlast would be leaving La Coka Nostra due to his daughter's medical issues.


=== Heavy Metal Kings with Vinnie Paz ===
Heavy Metal Kings is a group featuring veteran rappers Ill Bill (Non Phixion/La Coka Nostra) and Vinnie Paz (Jedi Mind Tricks/Army of the Pharaohs). In 2006, Ill Bill was featured on the single "Heavy Metal Kings" by hip hop duo Jedi Mind Tricks, released through Babygrande Records.
Ill Bill and Vinnie Paz have since combined forces to form a group of the same name, "Heavy Metal Kings", and recorded a full self-titled album that was released on April 5, 2011, through Enemy Soil/Uncle Howie.
Heavy Metal Kings 2 was officially confirmed and recording in 2013. It was announced that the album would be in stores in 2014 however as of March 2015. It was released in 2018 with the official name "Black God White Devil" and has numerous features from Goretex. .Heavy Metal Kings VS DJ Muggs was posted to be in the works by an associated producer on 2011, to this date this album has had no more updates or information released. It is not known if this album is still in the works.


== Solo albums/albums with brother Necro ==


=== The Early Years: Rare Demos '91–'94 (2001) ===
The Early Years: Rare Demos '91–'94 is the first rarities released on September 16, 2001, under Psycho+Logical-Records. The compilation contains 12 demos, an intro, two skits and one remix. Featured guests on the compilation include Gongo Boy and future Non Phixion and Circle of Tyrants member Goretex. These tracks were recorded between 1991 and 1994.


=== Street Villains mixtapes with brother Necro ===
Ill Bill and his brother Necro released two mixtapes named Street Villains Vol. 1 (2003) and Street Villains Vol. 2 (2005). Street Villains Vol. 1 was released originally to build hype for Ill Bill's at the time upcoming album What's Wrong with Bill?


=== Ill Bill Is the Future Vol. 1&2 (2003–2006) ===
Ill Bill Is the Future was released in 2003 on Ill Bills label Uncle Howie Records and is a mix of pre-released and new tracks with collaboration tracks with EI-P, The Beatnuts and Problemz.Ill Bill Is the Future 2: I'm a Goon was released in 2006 under Uncle Howie Records. The album featured mostly new tracks except for a few preused La Coka Nostra tracks and featured collaborations from artists such as Q-Unique, Raekwon, Sick Jacken, Block McCloud, MF Grimm and B-Real.


=== Howie Made Me Do It mixtapes ===
Recorded from 1999 to 2002, Howie Made Me Do It is a compilation of mostly songs previously released on mixtapes. Howie, the uncle of Ill Bill and Necro, is referenced in lyrics and his voice is sampled in various tracks.Howie Made Me Do It 2 was released in 2011 with collaborations from various artists such as Vinnie Paz and Q-Unique. Howie Made Me Do It 3 was released late 2013.


=== What's Wrong with Bill? (2004) ===
What's Wrong with Bill? is Ill Bill's debut studio album, released on May 4, 2004, by Psycho+Logical-Records. The album spawned one single, "The Anatomy of a School Shooting", and a music video for "Chasing the Dragon". Ill Bill's brother Necro produced the entire album. The album never charted but is widely known as an underground classic from Ill Bill by fans.


=== The Hour of Reprisal (2008) ===
On September 16, 2008, Ill Bill released his second album on Uncle Howie Records, entitled The Hour of Reprisal. The album includes appearances from Necro, Tech N9ne, B-Real of Cypress Hill, Everlast, Bad Brains, Max Cavalera of Soulfly, Vinnie Paz of Jedi Mind Tricks, Howard Jones of Killswitch Engage, Immortal Technique and Raekwon of Wu-Tang Clan. It also features production by DJ Muggs, T-Ray, DJ Lethal, Necro, DJ Premier and Ill Bill himself.
During spring 2008, Ill Bill joined Tech N9ne and Paul Wall on a nationwide tour. The Hour of Reprisal was released on September 16, 2008, by Uncle Howie Records and Fat Beats.


=== Kill Devil Hills (2010) with DJ Muggs ===
DJ Muggs vs. Ill Bill: Kill Devil Hills is a collaboration studio album by Ill Bill and producer DJ Muggs. The album was released on August 31, 2010, on Fat Beats Records. All songs were produced by DJ Muggs.


=== The Grimy Awards (2013) ===
His third album, The Grimy Awards, was released on January 29, 2013. The album includes appearances from H.R. of Bad Brains, A-Trak, El-P, Jedi Mind Tricks, O.C., Cormega, Meyhem Lauren, Q-Unique, Shabazz the Disciple & Lil Fame of M.O.P. and production by DJ Premier, DJ Muggs, Pete Rock, Large Professor, The Beatnuts, El-P, Ayatollah, MoSS and Ill Bill himself. The first single, "Severed Heads of State", featuring and produced by El-P, came out on October 29, 2012.


=== La Bella Medusa (2020) ===
La Bella Medusa, Ill Bill's fourth album, was released on October 30, 2020. Bill announced on social media that it had reached Apple Music's top ten for Hip Hop. The album was placed under releases by Joyner Lucas, Trippie Redd and Busta Rhymes on this chart. It included features from D.V. Alias Khryst, Conway the Machine, Pharoahe Monch, Tech N9ne, Rite Hook, Lord Goat, Recognize Ali, Jay Royale, Kool G Rap, Slaine, Little Vic, Crimeapple, Nems, Tony Yayo of G-Unit, Vinnie Paz and Sabac Red.


== Discography ==


=== Solo albums ===
2004: What's Wrong with Bill?
2008: The Hour of Reprisal
2013: The Grimy Awards
2016: Septagram
2020: La Bella Medusa
2023: Billy


=== Collaborative albums ===
2002: The Future Is Now (with Non Phixion)
2004: The Green CD/DVD (with Non Phixion)
2005: The Circle of Tyrants (with Circle of Tyrants)
2009: A Brand You Can Trust (with La Coka Nostra)
2010: Kill Devil Hills (with DJ Muggs)
2011: Heavy Metal Kings (with Heavy Metal Kings)
2012: Masters of the Dark Arts (with La Coka Nostra)
2016: To Thine Ownself Be True (with La Coka Nostra)
2017: Black God White Devil (with Heavy Metal Kings)
2018: Split (with Ghoul)
2019: Cannibal Hulk (EP) (with Stu Bangas)
2019: Pulp Phixion (EP) (with Sunday)
2020: Gorilla Twins (with Nems)


== References ==Jason Richard Hunter (born July 6, 1970), better known by his stage name Inspectah Deck, is an American rapper and hip hop producer. He is a member of the groups Wu-Tang Clan and Czarface.He has acquired critical praise for his intricate lyricism, and for his verses on many of the group's most revered songs. He has grown to become a producer in his own right, taking up tracks for fellow Wu rappers and his own projects.


== Early life ==
Hunter was born July 6, 1970, and grew up in Staten Island, New York. Hunter routinely mentions the Park Hill Projects in Clifton, Staten Island, where he grew up and went to school with  Method Man, Raekwon, Ghostface Killah, and Remedy. Hunter's father died when he was six years old.


== Career ==
Hunter developed a laid-back and quiet personality which he carried into his stage persona, as a low-key counterbalance to the antics of Method Man, Ol' Dirty Bastard, and RZA, referenced by Method Man at the end of the track "Can it Be All So Simple?" on Wu-Tang's debut album Enter the Wu-Tang (36 Chambers):

Inspectah Deck, he's like that dude that'll sit back and watch you play yourself and all that right? And see you sit there and know you lying; and he'll take you to court after that, cause he the Inspectah.
Despite this inconspicuous persona, Inspectah Deck maintained a relatively high profile, as he was the second most featured member on the album, and provided highly acclaimed verses for the singles "C.R.E.A.M.," "Protect Ya Neck," "Wu-Tang Clan Ain't Nuthing ta Fuck Wit," and "Da Mystery of Chessboxin'." In the years following, Hunter would appear on several Wu members' solo projects, including Method Man's Tical (1994), Raekwon's Only Built 4 Cuban Linx… (1995), GZA's Liquid Swords (1995), and Ghostface Killah's Ironman (1996). On Wu-Tang's second group album, Wu-Tang Forever (1997), Deck produced the track "Visionz" and contributed a solo track, "The City", as well as writing one of the most critically acclaimed verses in hip-hop on the group's hit single "Triumph". He would also provide production for some of his Wu cohorts, including "Elements" and "Spazzola" for Method Man's Tical 2000: Judgement Day (1998), "Kiss of a Black Widow" for RZA's RZA as Bobby Digital in Stereo (1998), and the title track for GZA's Beneath the Surface (1999).


=== Solo career ===
Inspectah Deck was originally supposed to be featured on the track "Got My Mind Made Up" by 2Pac for his album All Eyez on Me along with Lady of Rage, however both artists were cut out at Shakur's request. The song went on to feature Tha Dogg Pound, Redman, and Deck's fellow Wu-Tang Clan member Method Man. Despite his verse being cut out, he can still be heard at the end of the song saying "INS the rebel" before it fades out. His debut album Uncontrolled Substance was initially set for a 1995 release on Loud Records, on which he signed for $650,000. But after Loud was acquired by Sony, it was delayed and set to release in late 1997, however, this experienced several additional delays due to a flood in producer RZA's basement studio, which destroyed over one hundred beats, including all of the instrumentals made for the album. In September 1999, Uncontrolled Substance was released, and featured more of Deck's own production, and appearances from several lesser known affiliates. The album received generally favorable reviews from music critics, but failed to garner the reception attained by earlier Wu-Tang solo projects. Shortly after this release, Deck returned to the Wu-Tang fold for the group albums The W (2000), and Iron Flag (2001).
In 2003, Inspectah Deck released his second studio album, The Movement, which he would later state did not live up to his expectations, and in 2006, he released The Resident Patient, intended as a prequel to The Movement. In 2007, the rapper reconvened with the Wu-Tang Clan to record the group album 8 Diagrams. Along with Raekwon, and Ghostface Killah, Inspectah Deck
partook in the controversy, sparked when several group members disparaged RZA's tight artistic control of the album, championing Ghost's album The Big Doe Rehab. In regards to these disagreements, Deck stated in an interview:
I feel like we have to give them a newer, better album such as the new Ghost album. I’m not saying that’s the truth either. I’m just saying that his album sounds like what a Wu-Tang album should sound like, but it’s him by himself.
Around this time he announced two new projects: an album called Czarface as a new collaboration called Czarface with Boston's 7L & Esoteric featuring the legendary DJ Premier and his up-coming solo album The Rebellion, confirming production from RZA and the Wu-Elements; it is now set to come after The Resident Patient II, and will reportedly be his final album as a solo artist.On March 23, 2010, Inspectah Deck released his fourth solo album Manifesto, which features guest-appearances from Raekwon, Cormega, Termanology, Planet Asia, Cappadonna, Kurupt, and M.O.P.'s Billy Danze. In 2008, a mixtape entitled The Resident Patient II was leaked on to the internet; this features some original material, as well as freestyles over other artists' songs. Inspectah Deck stated in an interview that The Manifesto was meant to be the originally announced full-length sequel, Resident Patient II.
Since early 2010, Inspectah Deck has begun work on Czarface and The Rebellion, and has expressed his interest in working with several Wu-Tang members, as well as Snoop Dogg, E-40, Nas and Jadakiss on the album. He had mentioned in an interview with Conspiracy Radio that he will only retire from solo albums if the fans don't show support for The Manifesto and The Rebellion. He has also mentioned his plans to release an instrumental album of his own production, entitled The Bodyrock Volume 1, which is inspired by the instrumental albums released by Alchemist, Ayatollah, and Pete Rock. On February 11, 2013, in an interview with HipHopDX, Inspectah Deck stated that he also has an upcoming album with producer Agallah in the works, and later confirmed during that year that he had renamed his "The Rebellion" album to Rebellion 2013. He recently confirmed via Twitter that he has again changed the name of his final album to Uncontrolled Substance II, a sequel to his debut album; that will be produced primarily by RZA along with The Wu-Elements.After working with The Wu-Tang Clan on their sixth studio album A Better Tomorrow, he reunited with 7L & Esoteric for another Czarface album titled Every Hero Needs a Villain, which was released in June 2015, and again in 2016 for the third Czarface album, A Fistful of Peril, after Marvel Entertainment reached out to them to record a track for their Black Panther web-series.


== Discography ==

Studio albumsUncontrolled Substance  (1999)
The Movement (2003)
The Resident Patient (2006)
Manifesto (2010)
Chamber No. 9 (2019)MixtapesThe Resident Patient 2 (2008)
DrumLorD SkillionairE (2013)
Cynthia's Son (2014)with CzarfaceCzarface (2013)
Every Hero Needs a Villain (2015)
A Fistful of Peril (2016)
First Weapon Drawn (2017)
Czarface Meets Metal Face (with MF Doom) (2018)
Czarface Meets Ghostface (with Ghostface Killah) (2019)
The Odd Czar Against Us (2019)
Super What? (with MF Doom) (2021)
Czarmageddon! (2022)


== References ==


== External links ==
 Media related to Inspectah Deck at Wikimedia Commons
Inspectah Deck at IMDbRodney Stevenson (born January 31, 1974) better known by his stage name Islord is a rapper and a member of the hip hop group Killarmy. Although named Rodney Stevenson at birth,he, as all members of Killarmy, is a Five Percenter, and, thus, changed his name legally to Islord. The first three letters of his name: I, S, L, are also the first three letters of "Islam"; in the Five Percent way of life, "Islam" does not represent the religion but "I.S.L.A.M." which is often represented as  "I Self Lord And Master." The name Islord is a reiteration of the rapper's assertion of his divinity: "I Self Lord," and a fusion of the terms "Islam" and "lord." Islord is also known as the "Thief of Baghdad." In addition to appearing on Killarmy's albums, Islord appears on two tracks from Bobby Digital in Stereo and the song "Holy Water" from Dom Pachino's Unreleased solo album.


== Discography ==


== Videography ==


== References ==Justin Irvin Rivera (born September 23, 2001), better known by his stage name J.I the Prince of N.Y or more recently simply J.I., is an American rapper, singer, and songwriter. He is best known for his 2019 breakout single "Need Me", which has over 100 million streams on Spotify


== Early life ==
Rivera grew up in Crown Heights, Brooklyn and is of Puerto Rican descent. At a young age he was introduced by his parents to music like old-school hip hop and reggaeton, and would make rudimentary beats on a miniature keyboard. In school, English was his favorite subject and he would write short stories. He began writing raps and freestyling with his brothers in middle school, influenced by New York City rappers like Biggie, Nas, DMX, Jay-Z and Big Pun.


== Career ==

In 2016 he appeared on the second season of The Rap Game, a reality show competition hosted by Jermaine Dupri on Lifetime. The then fifteen-year-old secured his place on the show after Dupri found his freestyles on Instagram. In one of the challenges, Rivera placed in first, earning a spot on the cover of Hip Hop Weekly magazine. Although he did not win the overall competition, his impressive performance gained him a substantial following, and he released his debut single "No Static" soon thereafter. By the end of the year he had received more than 500,000 views on his YouTube channel.He released his first project in 2017, a three-track extended play called Barely Famous. After his clout from the show died down, he went through a period where he admits he lost his motivation and stopped focusing on his music. He blew all of his money from The Rap Game on marijuana and was considering a job in construction. After getting kicked out of his mom's house he made the decision to give music one last try and connected with his future manager Gabi Acevedo to restart his career.In October 2019 he released his mixtape Hood Life Krisis, Vol. 1, which included his breakout single "Need Me", a "melodic, punch-line laden" track sampling the 2000 song "Best of Me, Part 2" by Mýa featuring Jay-Z. In November, with the song at over 3 million streams on Spotify, it was announced he had signed a deal with Interscope Records via G*Starr Entertainment. He also put out his fifth and final music video for the album, this time for "Love Won't Change". As of 2022, "Need Me" remains his most-viewed with over 115 million YouTube views.
He released Hood Life Krisis, Vol. 2 that December and embarked on his first headlining national tour the following month. Holding the final shows in his hometown of New York, he became the first artist in history to sell out the legendary SOB's venue on three consecutive nights. Notably, in April, Drake paid him homage by playing and singing along to his songs "Used To" and "On Me" during an Instagram Live session with OVO Mark. A week later he released a new single, "Proud of Me", along with an accompanying music video. After appearing on Lil Tjay's State of Emergency EP, he further collaborated with him in June on the single "Hood Scars 2", which served as a followup to J.I.'s original song which had by then amassed 15 million streams across all platforms.In July 2020 he came out with the single "Spanglish" with Puerto Rican rapper Myke Towers, with both artists mixing English and Spanish in their verses. It served as the lead single to his next EP, Welcome to GStarr Vol. 1, which he released on July 17 and also featured Lil Durk. In the first 20 minutes, it garnered 1.3 million streams on Spotify. A few days prior, Spotify announced a partnership with J.I. as a part of its recently launched RADAR program meant to promote "world-class talent through [their] global marketing and editorial teams" with placement in their official playlists, a mini-documentary, third-party partnerships, a Spotify Singles recording and support on the EP release.On November 30, 2020, his single "Need Me" was certified gold by the RIAA, his first career plaque.On December 18, 2020, J.I released Hood Life Krisis, Vol. 3, the third installment in his Hood Life Krisis series. The EP includes a sole guest appearance from A Boogie wit da Hoodie on the track "R&B Shit".


== Artistry ==
He has been described as having a "penchant for syrupy melodies." His melodic rap-sung style and distinctive New York accent have resulted in comparisons to A Boogie wit da Hoodie and Lil Tjay.


== Discography ==


=== Mixtapes ===


=== Extended plays ===


=== Guest appearances ===


== References ==


== External links ==
Official websiteJames Victor Heinz, known professionally as J57, is an American rapper, singer, songwriter, record producer, record executive, and music video director that infuses hip hop with indie rock, pop, folk & Americana music.  He is a member of the  Brown Bag AllStars, a group of emcees he helped create while working at Fat Beats in 2004, and Jamo Gang, a hip-hop group along with Ras Kass and El Gant. J57 cites DJ Eclipse and his mentor  DJ Premier, as his musical influences. He owns a record label called FiveSe7en Collective which is the home of a lot of new, promising talent in different genres of music.


== 2003–2007: Early beginnings and Brown Bag AllStars ==
Born and raised in Long Island, New York, J57 started his music career freestyling, battle rapping and beatboxing in high school under the stage name JLOG1C with a group of friends. In 2003, he started producing and went on to record his first recording with his crew. In 2004, JLOG1C started working at Fat Beats, a popular record store in New York where he met the Brown Bag AllStars and went on to record songs with the group at Jesse Shatkin's record studio.


== 2008–13: 2057, The Ports and The J57 Collection ==
In 2008, JLOG1C changed his name to J57 before Brown Bag AllStars released their first mixtape The Brown Tape, exclusively at Fat Beats. On May 14, 2010 he released the Digital Society mixtape through Balanced Records, featuring vocals from Homeboy Sandman, the Brown Bag AllStars, Soul Khan, Andrew Reid, DJ Brace and many notable acts. In 2012 he released his DJ Concept-promoted mixtape The J57 Collection and two solo EPs 2057 and The Ports EP, all which did well to gain him grounds and further led him to being ranked No. 20 in AllHipHop's list of "Top 50 in  Underground Hip-Hop". After overseeing projects for Koncept, Soul Khan, Sene and other artistes, including Homeboy Sandman's fourth studio album titled First of a Living Breed, he went on to release Walk in the Sun, a collaborative album he did with Blame One which was released in 2013.


== 2014–2017: I'm the J57 ==
In 2014, J57 was featured in DJ Rhettmatic's single titled "Louis Vuitton Wallets" and made vocal appearance and record production credits in the 2014 release of the annual Brown Bag AllStars A Year in Review mixtapes. In mid-2015, he produced "Purple Tape", one of the lead singles from Method Man's fifth studio album The Meth Lab which went on to peak at No. 57 on the US Billboard 200 and was received to positive reviews. On November 20, 2015, J57 teamed up with Koncept to release a joint EP titled The Fuel which was positively received among music critics.On January 19, 2016, J57 released his first solo album titled I'm the J57 to positive reviews. before he went on to produce the entirety of  Elixir, a 7-track gritty hip-hop studio album by Aaron Rose which gained multiple media attention. In an interview with HipHopDX, J57 revealed that 5 hip-hop albums including Moment of Truth, Madvillainy,  Be,  Below the Heavens and Ironman inspired him in creating the beats for the album. The beginning of 2017 saw J57 become a member of hip-hop group Jamo Gang which DJ Premier formally announced in January. In June, he released the music video for "Legacy" as a promotional tool to mark the release of the deluxe version of I'm the J57 and further decided to donate all proceeds earned from the album to people who were affected by the Flint water crisis. As part of the group Jamo Gang, J57 produced the entirety of their debut project Jamo Gang EP, an 8-track hip-hop, boom bap EP HipHopDX described as "intoxicating".


== 2018: FiveSe7en Collective ==
June 2018, J57 launched his record label FiveSe7en Collective.  Jamo Gang (Ras Kass, J57, El Gant)'s debut self-titled EP was released, featuring DJ Premier, Snak the Ripper and more. J57 released 3 albums and 3 EP's; one of which titled "LP2" an avant-garde release available exclusively for one week on J57's website.


== 2019-2020: DJ Premier, Atmosphere, Jamo Gang ==
In 2019, J57 released self-produced “VOLTAIRE.” EP  as well as the Heem Stogied & J57 “False Guidance” LP, capping the year off with his 2nd studio album “We Can Be Kings” which features Sid Wilson from Slipknot, Jay Jennings from Snark Puppy, Jamo Gang & more. 100% of the proceeds from the VOLTAIRE. limited edition CD release went to the Flint Water Crisis.
J57 released/was a part of over 400 songs released in 2020; over 20 albums, over 10 EP’s & over 30 singles.  The debut album from Jamo Gang “Walking with Lions” released in May 2020 via Fat Beats Records which is where J57 made his directorial debut for the single/music video “The 1st Time” featuring DJ Premier & Slug from Atmosphere.  As a joke he created an EP as Tiger King’s Joe Exotic in under an hour and released it.  A couple of the songs went viral on TikTok, Instagram & Twitter.  He also created a new sub-genre; DRILL BAP which is a cross between boom bap hiphop and Brooklyn Drill.  J57 donates 100% of the proceeds from a Bandcamp-only EP to the NAACP LDF and 100% of the proceeds from one of his singles to 540W Main (an online hub for antiracist education & events that promote justice for all).


== 2021-2022: Chavez Sound, solo projects,  CHROMESTHESIA EP ==
In 2021 J57 produced lead singles and key album tracks for Skyzoo, Blu (rapper), & Mon Rovîa. He and Ric Chavez launched their new record label, Chavez Sound, which is a subsidiary of FiveSe7en Collective and Soulspazm. Then in 2022, J57 released three self-produced vocal EP’s; "Death By Astral Projection" (featuring Lil B), "Anti-Social Media 2 EP", and "CHROMESTHESIA EP" (featuring Homeboy Sandman, Skyzoo, Blu & more).
In early 2022, J57 released one beat tape per week for the entirety of January, February and March, totaling 13 beat tapes/instrumental albums; one per week for 3 months straight.


== Upcoming projects ==
J57 is currently working on solo projects that include a collaborative EP with Homeboy Sandman and a solo hip hop album that he first started working on while in Australia where he linked up with Joey Bada$$


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===
Digital Society (2010)
The Analog Tape (2011)
The Analogue Tape 2 (2013)
Walk in the Sun (with Blame One) (2013)
I'm the J57 (2016)
I'm the J57 Deluxe Edition (2017)
LP2 (2018)
Instrumentals Vol 7 (2019)
Instrumentals Vol 8  (2019)
Instrumentals Vol 9  (2019)
Cobra Instrumentals: Crimson Guard Bangers, Vol. 1 (with Rob Viktum)  (2019)
57 Seconds (with DeeJay Element)  (2019)
FiveSe7en Collective Instrumentals Vol 1  (2019)
FiveSe7en Collective Instrumentals Vol 2  (2019)
We Can Be Kings.  (2019)
False Guidance (with Heem Stogied)  (2019)
Instrumentals Vol 10  (2020)
Precious Stones (with Shabaam Sahdeeq) (2020)
Precious Stones [Instrumentals] (with Shabaam Sahdeeq) (2020)
Walking with Lions (as Jamo Gang) (2020)
Stargazers (2020)
Collection (with Ric Chavez) (2020)
The Palette (with Dr.Doppler) (2020)
My First Beat CD 2003 (2020)
My First Beat CD 2003 Deluxe (2020)
2005 Beat CD (2020)
The Analog Tape 3.4  (2020)
Halloween Volume 1 (as Any Stranger) (2020)
Halloween Volume 2 (as Any Stranger) (2020)
Sugar Dose (as Any Stranger) (2020)
San Remo Britanica (as Any Stranger) (2020)
Hours (as Any Stranger) (2020)
Contra Search (as Contra Search) (2020)
Hypno (as Contra Search) (2020)
Black Flags (as Dream Fountains) (2020)
The Downward Fall (as March Captains) (2020)
Marzo (as March Captains) (2020)
Saturn de Mourning CarTunes Vol 1 (2021)
Collection 2 (with Ric Chavez) (2021)
 '83 Kids (with Dillon) (2021)
The Lord of Sleep EP (Sleep Music Album) (2021)
XERO Beat Tape (2022)
MOON BAP Beat Tape (2022)
j.exe & J57 Beat Tape (with j.exe) (2022)
Ric Chavez & J57 Beat Tape (with Ric Chavez) (2022)
Boricua Sandy & J57 Beat Tape (with Boricua Sandy) (2022)
magnanimous Beat Tape (2022)
ALONE IN MY GHOST TOWN Beat Tape (2022)
KATANA Beat Tape (2022)
The Audible Doctor & J57 8bit Beat Tape (with The Audible Doctor) (2022)
BROWN BAG ERA BEAT TAPE (2007-2013) (2022)
Ash of Pompeii Beat Tape (2022)
VERUCA Beat Tape (2022)
FURIO Beat Tape (2022)
The Lord of Meditation - 57BPM (Meditation Album) (2022)


=== EPs ===
Eye Don't Dream...But I Do (with Sene) (2010)
2057 (2012)
The Ports (2012)
Malt Disney (J57 Remixes) (with Koncept) (2013)
Trill Cunningham (with F. Virtue) (2013)
Wax Aesthetic (2014)
Mute Dialogue (2014)
Instrumentals Vol. 1 (2014)
The Sample-Free Remix (2015)
Instrumentals Vol. 2 (2015)
The Fuel (with Koncept) (2015)
Sock Money (with Juan Deuce) (2015)
There's No I in Antcs (with Jesse Mechanic) (2016)
Landmines (2016)
Element 4 President (with DeeJay Element) (2016)
Elixir (with Aaron Rose) (2016)
Instrumentals Vol. 3 (2016)
The Aware Wolves (as member of The Aware Wolves) (2017)
Sonic Boom Bap (2017)
Instrumentals Vol. 4 (2018)
Instrumentals Vol. 5 (2018)
Instrumentals Vol. 6 (2019)
Anti-Social Media (2019)
VOLTAIRE. (2019)
The Analog Tape 3.1 (2020)
The Analog Tape 3.2 (2020)
The Analog Tape 3.3 (2020)
Joe Exotic / Tiger King EP (2020)
All Proceeds From this EP Go to the NAACP LDF EP (2020)
2004 Beat CD (2020)
2006 Beat CD (2020)
2007 Beat CD (2020)
2008 Beat CD (2020)
Nuclear Wintour (2020)
FiveSe7en Christmas (2020)
DRILL BAP (2020)
The Invisible Boy (as Dream Fountains) (2020)
Summerisle Catharsis (as Any Stranger) (2020)
Element57 EP (with DeeJay Element) (2021)
Element57 Remixes EP (with DeeJay Element) (2021)
Ecto-1 EP (2021)
All Proceeds From This EP Go to UNICEF EP (Bandcamp Only) (2021)
All Proceeds From This EP Go to the NAACP LDF Part 2 (Bandcamp Only) (2021)
6057 (60 East & J57) EP (with 60 East) (2021)
All Proceeds From This EP Go to the NAACP LDF Part 3 EP (Bandcamp Only) (2022)
Anti-Social Media 2 EP (2022)
Anti-Social Media 2 (Remixes) EP (2022)
DEATH BY ASTRAL PROJECTION EP (2022)
CHROMESTHESIA EP (2022)


== References ==


== External links ==
J57 discography at Discogs
J57 at AllMusic
Official websiteJeffrey Bruce Atkins Sr. (born February 29, 1976), better known by his stage name Ja Rule (), is an American rapper. Born and raised in New York City, he debuted in 1999 with Venni Vetti Vecci and its lead single "Holla Holla". During the 2000s, Ja Rule was signed to Irv Gotti's Murder Inc. Records, formerly known as The Inc. From 1999 to 2005, Ja Rule had multiple hits that made the top 20 of the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 chart, including "Between Me and You" (featuring Christina Milian), "I'm Real (Murder Remix)" and "Ain't It Funny" (both with Jennifer Lopez)—which both topped the Hot 100—the number 1 hit "Always on Time" (featuring Ashanti), "Mesmerize" (featuring Ashanti), and "Wonderful" (featuring R. Kelly and Ashanti).
Ja Rule has been nominated for two American Music Awards and four Grammy Awards with respective collaborators Lil' Mo, Vita, Ashanti and Case. Following the release of his platinum-selling debut Venni Vetti Vecci (1999), he released his respective second and third albums Rule 3:36 (2000) and Pain Is Love (2001). Both albums topped the US Billboard 200 album chart, launching him into the mainstream, selling over a combined 15 million units to a wide audience, and attaining triple platinum status from the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA), becoming his bestselling albums to date. Ja Rule followed up with his respective fourth, fifth and sixth albums The Last Temptation (2002), Blood in My Eye (2003), and R.U.L.E. (2004), with The Last Temptation attaining platinum status and R.U.L.E. reaching gold status. As of 2018, Ja Rule has sold 14.4 million units in the US and has sold over 30 million records worldwide. In 2019, he joined the main cast of WeTV's Growing Up Hip Hop: New York.
Outside of music, Ja Rule attracted notable scrutiny for his involvement in the fraudulent Fyre Festival, which he co-founded with con artist Billy McFarland. In November 2019, he was cleared of any legal wrongdoing from his role in the festival.


== Early life ==
Ja Rule was born Jeffrey Bruce Atkins on February 29, 1976, to Debra and Will in Hollis, a section of the Queens borough of New York City. Jeffrey's father left the family when he was very young. Atkins was raised as an only child, as his younger sister, Kristen, died in the womb when Atkins was 5. His mother, Debra, was a healthcare worker, and due to the amount of time she spent working, Atkins was largely raised by his grandparents as a Jehovah's Witness. Atkins' mother left the Jehovah's Witness religion when he was 12. Soon after, Atkins began selling drugs in Hollis.


== Career ==


=== Cash Money Click (1994–95) ===
Atkins began his rap career in 1994 with the hip hop group Cash Money Click alongside members Chris Black and O-1. He took the stage name "Ja Rule", telling MTV News that the name came from a friend who addressed him by that name; other friends simply called him "Ja". Together they worked with producer DJ Irv to produce a number of songs, releasing their debut single "Get Tha Fortune" independently in 1994. After the group signed with TVT Records, the song was re-released through the label later that year as the B-side to their second single, "4 My Click". "4 My Click" featured Mic Geronimo and became popular on pirate radio, eventually receiving airplay on Yo! MTV Raps. Plans for the release of the group's eponymous debut studio album were brought to a halt in 1995 after Chris Black was sentenced to five years in prison and the group was dropped from TVT, which led to their third single "She Swallowed It" never officially being released, however it was later bootlegged. With no label, the group disbanded shortly after being dropped.


=== Solo career and Venni Vetti Vecci (1995–1999) ===
After being dropped from TVT, Ja Rule maintained a close relationship with DJ Irv, who was working as an executive producer for Def Jam at the time. DJ Irv, now known as Irv Gotti, was hired as an A&R for the label and was able to get Ja Rule a contract with Def Jam. In 1995, he made his first solo appearance on Mic Geronimo's "Time to Build" alongside Jay-Z and DMX, who were also in their early stages of their careers. He later appeared on the song "Usual Suspects" from Mic Geronimo's second album Vendetta in 1997, alongside The Lox, DMX and Tragedy Khadafi. He also had a brief cameo in the video for "Walk In New York" by Queens hardcore rap group Onyx. Later in 1997, Irv Gotti was granted his own imprint from Def Jam, known as Murder Inc. Records. Ja Rule was promoted as the label's flagship artist, and he continued to make guest appearances on songs by other artists, including Method Man, Redman, Nas, DMX, LL Cool J and Dru Hill. He later appeared on Jay-Z's 1998 hit single "Can I Get A...", for which he wrote the hook. It was originally planned to be Ja Rule's debut single until Jay-Z heard the track and requested it for himself. During this time, he rapped under the slightly modified stage name Jah.Returning to the Ja Rule name, his debut single Holla Holla was released in March 1999 and became a hit, peaking at #35 on the Billboard Hot 100. Fueled by the success of Holla Holla, Ja Rule's debut album, Venni Vetti Vecci, was released in 1999, peaking at #3 on the Billboard 200 with 184,000 copies sold in its first week. It eventually reached platinum status in the US due to the popularity of "Holla Holla". A remix of "Holla Holla" was later released, featuring Jay-Z, Vita, Cadillac Tah, Black Child, Memphis Bleek and Busta Rhymes.


=== Rule 3:36, Pain Is Love and The Last Temptation (2000–2002) ===
Ja Rule's second single, "Between Me and You", featuring Christina Milian, was released in June 2000 as the first single from his second studio album and became his first major crossover hit, earning Top 40 airplay and reaching #11 on the Billboard Hot 100. The album's next single, "Put It on Me", featuring Vita and Lil' Mo, was released in December 2000 and became one of the biggest hits of 2001, reaching #8 on the Billboard Hot 100 and becoming the first top 10 hit for both Ja Rule and Vita. The video for "Put It on Me" also topped the MTV Video Countdown for a week, and became the first music video to be retired on BET's 106 & Park after spending more than 60 days on the countdown. The video also ranked #1 on BET's Notarized: Top 100 Videos of 2001.Ja Rule's second album, Rule 3:36, was released on October 10, 2000, and went in a much different stylistic direction from Venni Vetti Vecci, changing his almost trademark hardcore hip-hop sound to mainstream-oriented pop-rap, debuting at #1 on the Billboard 200 with 276,000 copies sold in its first week, making it Ja Rule's first number one album. The album later went on to be certified triple platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA).The success of Rule 3:36 promoted Ja Rule to international status, and made Murder Inc. one of the biggest labels in the United States. The same success followed with his third album, which spawned three top 10 singles, two of them reaching #1. The first, "Livin' It Up", featuring Case, was released in July 2001 and reached #6 on the Billboard Hot 100. It also achieved success in the United Kingdom, reaching #5 on the UK Singles Chart. The second single, "Always on Time", was released in October 2001 and marked the first major guest appearance for Murder Inc's youngest artist Ashanti, and became both Ja Rule and Ashanti's first song to top the Billboard Hot 100. The remix of Jennifer Lopez's "I'm Real" featuring Ja Rule was included on the album and topped the Billboard Hot 100 for five non-consecutive weeks, beginning September 8, 2001, and also topped the Hot 100 Airplay chart. The song was a staple of R&B/hip hop and pop radio during the summer and fall of 2001, spending fifteen weeks total in the top five of the Hot 100. In 2009 the single was named the 30th most successful song of the 2000s, on the Billboard Hot 100 Songs of the Decade. The album's fourth single, "Down Ass Bitch" featuring Charli Baltimore was also successful, reaching #21 on the Hot 100.Ja Rule released his third studio album, Pain Is Love, on October 2, 2001. Like its predecessor, Pain Is Love topped the Billboard 200 with first-week sales of 361,000 copies and is certified triple platinum by the RIAA. The album also received a Grammy nomination in 2002 for Best Rap Album. By 2007, 3.6 million copies of Pain Is Love had been sold.The Last Temptation, Ja Rule's fourth album, was released on November 19, 2002. It spawned two hit singles, "Thug Lovin'", featuring Bobby Brown, which peaked at #42 on the Billboard Hot 100, and "Mesmerize", a duet with Ashanti that peaked at #2 on the Billboard Hot 100. The Last Temptation debuted at #4 on the Billboard 200 with first-week sales of 237,000 copies and was certified platinum by the RIAA in December 2002.


=== 50 Cent feud, Blood in My Eye and R.U.L.E. (2003–2004) ===
Shortly after the release of his fourth studio album, Ja Rule's ongoing beef with fellow Queens rapper 50 Cent reached its peak, with both artists taking to radio stations almost daily to trade insults and diss tracks. On January 3, 2003, the Murder Inc. offices were raided by FBI agents and NYPD officers due to accusations of money laundering and drug trades toward Kenneth "Supreme" McGriff, who was associated with Irv Gotti. Due to the federal investigation, Ja Rule had a late response in his beef with 50 Cent. By association, 50 Cent's labelmates Eminem, Obie Trice, D12, and Ja Rule's former friends and associates DMX and Busta Rhymes were brought into the feud too. Ja Rule released the diss track "Loose Change" in April 2003, where he attacks 50 Cent, as well as Eminem, Busta Rhymes and Dr. Dre. 50 Cent eventually responded with "Hail Mary", which used the beat from 2Pac's song of the same name and featured Eminem and Busta Rhymes. The beef continued to be highly publicized throughout 2003, and eventually led to Ja Rule meeting with Minister Louis Farrakhan in October, who wanted to intervene and prevent escalating violence in the feud.Ja Rule's fifth studio album, Blood in My Eye, was released on November 4, 2003, under the Murder Inc. label, which renamed itself "The Inc." several days after the album release. The material was intended simply as a mixtape, but was released as an album to fulfill Ja Rule's contractual commitment to Murder Inc. to release one annually. The album was described as a "hate" album directed at various rappers, including 50 Cent, G-Unit, Eminem, Proof, Dr. Dre, DMX, Busta Rhymes and others, and marked a return to the hardcore style Ja Rule had used in his earlier career. It spawned one hit single, "Clap Back", which reached #44 on the Billboard Hot 100 and won a Source Award for "Fat Tape" song of the year. It peaked at #6 on the Billboard Hot 200, selling 139,000 copies in its first week of release, and had sold over 468,000 copies in the U.S. by 2008.Ja Rule's sixth studio album, R.U.L.E., was released in November 2004, debuting at #7 and selling 166,000 copies in its first week of release. Its lead single, "Wonderful", featuring R. Kelly and Ashanti, peaked at #5 on the Billboard Hot 100. The single was followed by the street anthem "New York", featuring Fat Joe and Jadakiss, which charted at #27 on the Billboard Hot 100. The third single was the love song "Caught Up", featuring Lloyd, which had failed to make an impact on the Billboard Hot 100. The RIAA certified R.U.L.E. Gold on January 14, 2005, and by October 2007 the album had sold 658,000 copies.


=== Hiatus, departure from Def Jam, decline of The Inc. Records (2005–09) ===
On December 6, 2005, The Inc. released Exodus, a greatest hits album whose only new tracks were the song "Me" and intro and outro tracks. Exodus was the last album on Ja Rule's contract with The Inc. After its release, Ja Rule took a hiatus from recording music. Meanwhile, The Inc. Records was still under investigation because of alleged drug trades with Kenneth "Supreme" McGriff. This led to Def Jam Recordings refusing to renew The Inc.'s contract. From 2005 to 2006, Gotti searched for other labels, finally reaching a deal with Universal Records (part of the same company as Def Jam). A few years later The Inc. left Universal Records due to business issues and failure to secure funds for projects. In 2007, Ja Rule founded record label Mpire Music Group.


=== Pain Is Love 2, prison, and release (2011–2013) ===
In February 2011, it was announced that Ja Rule had started working on a new album, Pain Is Love 2, to be produced by the producers of the original Pain Is Love album to "recreate magic". Most of the production was to be done by 7 Aurelius (who co-produced "Down Ass Bitch"), while Irv Gotti was to be executive producer. Ja Rule had planned on releasing it on June 7, 2011, but decided to delay the release in order to allow more time to perfect the "level and quality of the records" and to avoid "doing an injustice to [his] fans". A revised release date of October 11, 2011, was also pushed back. During the delay, Ja Rule released a new track, "Falling to Pieces", produced by 7 Aurelius, which samples The Script's "Breakeven". On October 2, 2011, another track, "Spun a Web", was released, also produced by 7 Aurelius and sampling Coldplay's "Trouble". The following day a teaser video premiered on YouTube, and the official video was released on October 11. Pain Is Love 2 was finally released on February 28, 2012, by which time Ja Rule was serving a two-year sentence in prison for gun possession and tax evasion.
Ja Rule was released from prison on May 7, 2013. Alongside Lil Wayne and Birdman, he appeared on the remix of the track "She Tried", which appeared on the N.O.R.E album Student of the Game. On September 18, 2013, Ja Rule released a track titled "Fresh Out Da Pen". The track had first premiered on Hot 97. A few days later he released "Everything". Both tracks were produced by Visionary producers Reefa and Myles William. On September 27, 2013, both tracks were released on iTunes for digital download. In September 2013, it was confirmed that Ja Rule and Gotti had relaunched Murder Inc Records.


=== Memoir, reality show and future projects (2014–present) ===
In 2014, Ja Rule released a memoir, Unruly: The Highs and Lows of Becoming a Man, in which he reflected on his past struggles with a difficult adolescence in New York City and everything that followed, from breakout success and destructive rivalries to fatherhood and a two-year prison sentence. In July 2014, Ja Rule announced his eighth studio album, which was eventually pushed back to a 2016 release. Also in 2014, MTV announced that Ja Rule and his family would star in the upcoming reality show Follow the Rules which was co-produced by Queen Latifah. A sneak peek trailer of the show surfaced on the internet in September 2014 and the show premiered on October 26, 2015. In October 2015, Rule announced that he and Gotti had partnered with Paramount Pictures on a TV drama series based on the history of Murder Inc., set to premiere in 2016. In February 2016, Ja Rule announced that his upcoming eighth studio album would be titled Coup De Grâce and would be his last album. In December 2016, he appeared on The Hamilton Mixtape, rapping Hamilton's verse in Ashanti's performance of "Helpless", referencing Lin-Manuel Miranda's impression of him in the last line of that verse. On June 26, 2018, Ashanti confirmed that she and Ja Rule are working on a collaborative album.On October 15, 2021, in celebration of the twentieth anniversary of the release of his third studio album, Pain is Love, Ja Rule released the single, "Sincerely, Jeffrey" for all streaming platforms.


=== Acting ===
His first film was a buddy movie with Pras, Turn It Up; he appeared in a minor role in The Fast and the Furious. He appeared in several movies including Back in the Day with Ving Rhames and Pam Grier and Half Past Dead as Steven Seagal's co-star. He also starred in the movies The Cookout with Queen Latifah and Assault on Precinct 13. In 2013, he starred in I'm in Love with a Church Girl.


=== Other ventures ===
In 2004, Ja Rule and Gotti launched an urban clothing line called ErvinGeoffrey. In 2006, Ja Rule launched a liquor company, The Mojito.In May 2015, Ja Rule partnered with Billy McFarland, the CEO of the credit card service company Magnises, to become its creative head and spokesman. In August 2015, Ja Rule collaborated with footwear businessman Steve Madden on a new line of men's sneakers called Maven x Madden, which were released for sale by fall 2015.In 2016, Ja Rule co-founded Fyre Media, Inc., a talent booking agency, with Billy McFarland. In April 2017, the venture touted its Fyre Festival in Hamilton, Bahamas, as a luxury event, but it was fraudulent, disappointing hundreds of ticket-buyers. Rule and McFarland faced a $100 million class action suit.In 2020, Ja Rule developed a live-streaming app called "Iconn Live". The app debuted on Apple TV in November 2022.In 2021, Ja Rule partnered with a team of software engineers to launch Flipkick, a platform focusing on selling physical works of art as non-fungible tokens. Flipkick claims to be "the first company to offer cryptographic authentication of physical works of art sold as and linked to NFTs." To inaugurate the platform, Ja Rule listed for auction a painting he commissioned in 2012 by artist Tripp Derrick Barnes depicting the Fyre Media Inc logo. The painting was listed with an estimate of $600,000.In June 2023, Ja Rule launched a premium wine label called Rose Vine Cellars.


== Personal life ==
Atkins earned his GED while in prison in February 2012. In February 2021, Atkins completed an online course at Harvard Business School and shared a photo of his certificate of completion on Twitter.


=== Family ===
In April 2001, Ja Rule married Aisha Murray. The couple have three children: Brittney Asja Atkins (born 1995), Jeffrey Jr. (born 2000), and Jordan (born 2003).


=== Religion ===
Raised as a Jehovah's Witness for most of his childhood, Ja Rule identifies as a Christian. He "reconnected with God" in 2013 while promoting the movie I'm in Love with a Church Girl. He was baptized, along with his wife, in 2013.


== Legal issues ==
In 2003, he allegedly punched a man in Toronto, who later sued. He received a $1,200 fine after pleading guilty to assault.In 2004, police investigated whether a feud involving Murder Inc. led to a fatal shooting outside a nightclub party hosted by Ja Rule and Leon Richardson.On July 1, 2004, Ja Rule was arrested for driving with a suspended license and possessing marijuana.In July 2007, Ja Rule was arrested for gun and drug possession charges along with Lil Wayne, who served eight months in prison during 2010 for attempted possession of a weapon stemming from the arrest. The court rejected Ja Rule's argument that the gun was illegally obtained evidence.On December 13, 2010, Ja Rule received a two-year prison sentence after pleading guilty to attempted possession of a weapon after the aforementioned 2007 arrest. On March 8, 2011, Ja Rule's surrender date for his two-year prison sentence was set for June 8. He was first sent to Rikers Island, then later to a state facility in Upstate New York.In July 2011, Ja Rule received an additional 28-month prison sentence for tax evasion, to run concurrently with his state term, failing to pay taxes on more than $3 million in earnings between 2004 and 2006. He was released from state prison on February 21, 2013, but was immediately taken into federal custody for the tax case, for which he had less than six months remaining on his sentence. Ja Rule was held in Brooklyn's Metropolitan Detention Center and was set to be released on July 28, 2013. Ja Rule was released from prison early on May 7, 2013.By July 1, 2017, Ja Rule faced more than a dozen lawsuits filed by ticket buyers and investors in the failed Fyre Festival and his partner in the venture, Billy McFarland, had been indicted for fraud. In November 2019, charges were reportedly dropped against Ja Rule in connection with the lawsuits.


== Feuds ==


=== 50 Cent ===
Before signing with Interscope Records, rapper 50 Cent engaged in a well-publicized feud with Ja Rule and his label Murder Inc. Records. 50 Cent claimed that the feud began in 1999 after Ja Rule spotted him with a man who robbed him of his jewelry and also because Ja Rule was "trying to be Tupac". However, Ja Rule claimed the conflict stemmed from a video shoot in Queens because 50 Cent did not like Ja Rule "getting so much love" from the neighborhood. 50 Cent indirectly confirmed this in an interview with XXL Magazine, where 50 Cent states he was upset with Ja Rule for being under the aegis of Kenneth "Supreme" McGriff. A confrontation occurred in Atlanta in which Ja Rule claims he struck 50 Cent with a baseball bat, later his crew stepping in to beat up 50 Cent. Another confrontation occurred while in a New York studio where rapper Black Child, a Murder Inc. artist, stabbed 50 Cent, causing a wound requiring four stitches.In his book, 50 Cent details how Kenneth "Supreme" McGriff tried to resolve the conflict between him and Ja Rule. Allegedly, McGriff asked 50 Cent to leave them alone because of the money involved. 50 Cent insinuated the conflict had something to do with the shooting where he was ambushed and shot.
Since then, Black Child and other Murder Inc. rappers such as Cadillac Tah publicly insulted 50 Cent with "There's a Snitch in the Club" by Cadillac Tah, and "The Real Wanksta" by Black Child. In both songs, Black Child details violent actions directed toward 50 Cent. The exchange of insult tracks released from both parties culminated in Ja Rule's Blood in My Eye, which was an album that returned additional insults to 50 Cent. Because of the ongoing feud between the two, 50 Cent's labelmates Eminem, Dr. Dre, Obie Trice, D12, DMX, Busta Rhymes, and the rest of the members of G-Unit, also became involved and released tracks which insulted Ja Rule.Ja Rule later released R.U.L.E. which included the successful single "New York", featuring Jadakiss and Fat Joe, in which Ja Rule obliquely attacked 50 Cent. This single prompted 50 Cent to enter a feud with the two featured artists, reflected in his response, "Piggy Bank".
Although it seemed that the feud was over, Ja Rule returned with a track titled "21 Gunz". In response, Lloyd Banks and 50 Cent released the track "Return of Ja Fool" on Lloyd Banks' mixtape Mo Money in the Bank Pt. 4, Gang Green Season Starts Now.In an interview with MTV, Ja Rule stated, in reference to his album, The Mirror:

There was a lot of things I wanted to say, and I didn't want there to be any bitter records on the album. Because I'm not bitter about anything that happened [in the past few years].
In May 2011, it was confirmed that both Ja Rule and 50 Cent had ended the feud. Ja Rule said, "I'm cool. We ain't beefing no more. We'll never collaborate. That's just what it is. You don't have to be at war with somebody, but it's also kind of like U.S. and another country that they may not get along with. We don't gotta go to war, but we're not friends either. But we can coincide inside of a world. He's doing him, and he's not thinking about me, and I'm doing me and I'm not thinking about him."
In September 2013, in an interview with Angie Martinez on The Angie Martinez show on HOT 97, both Rule and Irv Gotti acknowledged 50 Cent not only took a toll on Ja Rule's prominence, but along with the federal indictment, damaged Murder, Inc., as a music label. They told Martinez their immediate reaction on hearing 50 Cent's single, "In Da Club", on the radio was that it was "so dope" and that they had a problem with it. They also disclosed that they had been blackballed from various award shows where 50 Cent was to perform due to their feud. Notwithstanding seeing 50 Cent as a hustler, they liked his entrepreneurial mentality, 10 years on, no longer had a problem with him. Ja Rule indicated he had plans to write a book surrounding the whole experience.
In early 2018, after four years of taunting Ja Rule, 50 Cent reiginited the beef after he publicly dissed him on Big Boy's Neighborhood, leading to Ja Rule retaliating on Twitter the next day.


==== Shady/Aftermath ====
The conflict started after 50 Cent signed to Shady Records and Aftermath in 2002. Ja Rule and Irv Gotti expressed dissatisfaction with Eminem and Dr. Dre for signing an artist with whom they were in conflict and threatened to take action against them if they released any 50 Cent tracks deprecatory of Murder Inc.The conflict escalated when Ja Rule released "Loose Change" attacking 50 Cent, Eminem and Dr. Dre. The song also includes lyrics that insulted Eminem's family (most notably his then 7-year-old daughter Hailie Jade) and acquaintances. In response, Eminem, D12 and Obie Trice released the deprecatory track "Hailie's Revenge (Doe Rae Mi)" featuring vocals from Eminem's daughter.Busta Rhymes joined the conflict when he was featured on the track "Hail Mary 2003" with Eminem and 50 Cent. The song, which is a remake of Tupac Shakur's song "Hail Mary", was done partially as a response to Ja Rule's remake of Tupac's song, "Pain" (re-titled "So Much Pain"). The rappers felt Ja Rule could not compare to Tupac, and so they made the track, mocking him for trying to "imitate" the deceased rap icon. Eminem prevented Ja Rule from appearing on any of the "new" Tupac songs he produced, including those on Loyal to the Game.


=== DMX ===
After Murder Inc. broke up in 1999 due to animosity between DMX and Jay-Z, DMX accused Ja Rule of copying his signature "gruff style", and the two subsequently fell out. On the single "Where the Hood At?", DMX disses Ja Rule by replicating lyrics from other Ja Rule songs, referring to Ja Rule's controversy of being labeled as homophobic in the lyrics such as "I show no love to homo thugs" or "Last time I checked, you niggas having sex with the same sex". Ja Rule responded with several disses on his album, Blood in My Eye, including "Clap Back". DMX said that he wanted the dispute to end when he was released from jail in 2005: "[Irv] Gotti came to me in jail and said I want to make peace with you and him. I was like, 'All right, Gotti, let's do it man." DMX and Ja Rule finally ended their feud at VH1's 2009 Hip Hop Honors.


==== Kurupt ====
By his association with DMX, Ja Rule was brought into the beef between DMX and Kurupt, being dissed on Kurupt's 1999 song "Callin' Out Names". Ja Rule responded with "Still INC" featuring Black Child and Cadillac Tah, a freestyle over Dr. Dre's "Still D.R.E." beat. The two eventually squashed their beef on the set of the movie Half Past Dead in 2002.


=== Foxy Brown ===
In October 2002, rapper Foxy Brown dismissed reports of recording a track with rivals Nas and Ja Rule that was "potentially" deprecatory of Jay-Z. During a Thanksgiving week interview in 2002, while on Doug Banks In the Morning, Ja Rule stated that he "[couldn't] stand Foxy Brown." Brown reportedly heard Ja Rule's comments via a radio while she was helping her mother clean her house. Going against her manager's wishes, during her own interview with Doug Banks, Brown informed Banks that she was "flabbergasted" by Rule's comments. Brown explained she was particularly angry at Rule's response, having never met him.The incident provoked Brown to record the unreleased, "Get Off Me". In the record, Brown targeted Ja Rule and Eve with homophobic remarks. In 2005, Ja Rule and his two bodyguards were initial suspects in the killing of Willie "Willie Bang Bang" Clark, whom authorities linked as a "revenge" that stemmed back to a robbery case involving Foxy Brown's brother.In September 2009, Ja Rule and Foxy Brown ended their beef at the VH1 Hip Hop Honors, where they celebrated the twenty-fifth anniversary of their former label, Def Jam Recordings. The feud was squashed after both rappers shared a photo with ex-labelmates DMX and Ludacris.


=== Lil' Mo ===
In January 2003, while co-hosting 106 & Park: Prime, singer Lil' Mo sent a shout-out to 50 Cent, just seconds after she premiered a Ja Rule video. Ja Rule and the Murda, Inc., clique were outraged. In response, Ja Rule released "Loose Change", a track deprecatory of Eminem, 50 Cent, Dr. Dre, Chris Lighty and Lil' Mo. Rule rechristened Mo a "bitch", and credited himself with causing her popularity. In May 2003, Mo released a freestyle track attacking Ja Rule, where she interpolated the "Used to be my homie, used to be my ace, now I can't stand you, yeah I wanna slap the taste out your mouth." lyrics Dr. Dre used in his 1993 Eazy-E diss track "Fuck wit Dre Day".In April 2003, Lil' Mo sparked additional controversy, complaining of receiving neither recognition nor payment for her contributions to Rule's records "I Cry" and "Put It on Me". Mo told MTV News, "Those two records ["I Cry", "Put It on Me"] ruled 2001. The whole world knows that ... If I speak the truth, I can't apologize. I helped that brother sell 3 million records, and I don't have a plaque [for Rule 3:36]." By way of contrast, she highlighted Jay-Z's having given her recognition, a plaque, a thank you card and a bottle of Cristal for her work on his "Parking Lot Pimpin'". In 2005, Lil' Mo filed a lawsuit against Ja Rule, Murda Inc. and Def Jam Records for over $15 million. In 2010, the two reconciled. Lil' Mo stated that she ended the dispute as Ja Rule's career was in decline and noted that "life is too short ... You just never know what people are going through." In 2011, the two reunited and recorded a track together titled, "U & Me".


== Discography ==

Studio albumsVenni Vetti Vecci (1999)
Rule 3:36 (2000)
Pain Is Love (2001)
The Last Temptation (2002)
Blood in My Eye (2003)
R.U.L.E. (2004)
Pain Is Love 2 (2012)


== Filmography ==


=== Film ===


=== Television ===


=== Documentary ===


== Awards and nominations ==
American Music AwardsBET AwardsGQ Men of the Year AwardsGrammy AwardsMTV Video Music AwardsNAACP Image AwardsSoul Train Music AwardsTeen Choice Awards


== See also ==
Fyre Festival
Murder Inc.


== References ==


== External links ==

Ja Rule at IMDbJason Terrance Phillips (born May 27, 1975), better known by his stage name Jadakiss, is an American rapper from Yonkers, New York. He began his career in the 1990s as a member of the rap trio The Lox, managed by Ruff Ryders and signed with Bad Boy. After leaving the label in 1999, they signed a joint venture deal between Interscope Records and Ruff Ryders. He is currently signed to Def Jam, Roc Nation, and D-Block.
Jadakiss' debut solo album, Kiss Tha Game Goodbye, was released in 2001. He has released three more solo studio albums, another album with the Lox, and an album with fellow rapper Fabolous. In 2007, Jadakiss signed with Jay-Z's Roc-A-Fella and Def Jam, which, with Ruff Ryders, co-released his 2009 album The Last Kiss. Altogether, he has released five studio albums, most recently Ignatius in 2020.


== Early life ==
Jason Terrance Phillips was born on May 27, 1975, in Yonkers, New York, and had an interest in hip hop from an early age. At age 12, he began hustling after his parents asked him to earn his own money. He began freestyle rapping for money after watching other people do it on the street corner. While freestyling, he eventually met longtime friends Sheek Louch and Styles P.


== Career ==
Phillips quickly developed a small underground fanbase and at the age of 12, entered himself into a freestyle competition in Florida where he attracted the attention of the owners of Ruff Ryders. Along with Styles and Louch, he formed a group known as The Warlox, and the trio began rapping together. They eventually met Mary J. Blige, who, impressed with their lyrics, handed their demo to Puff Daddy, who signed the group to his label Bad Boy.


=== 1994–2000: The Lox ===
Upon signing with Bad Boy, Puff Daddy shortened the group's name from The Warloxs to simply The Lox. They made their first appearance on Main Source's 1994 LP Fuck What You Think on the track "Set it Off." They immediately began writing and performing on hit songs with fellow Bad Boy artists, including Puff Daddy's "It's All About the Benjamins" and "I Got the Power", Mase's "24 Hrs. to Live", Mariah Carey's "Honey", Mary J. Blige's "Can't Get You Off My Mind" and The Notorious B.I.G.'s "Last Day". The group developed a close relationship with B.I.G., during which time Jadakiss especially was taken under his wing. The Lox's first hit song was a tribute to The Notorious B.I.G. in the wake of his 1997 death, titled "We'll Always Love Big Poppa". The song was chosen as the B-side to Puff Daddy's smash hit B.I.G. tribute song "I'll Be Missing You", and received widespread commercial success, achieving multi-platinum status from the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). The success and reception of the song opened the door for them to write more of their own songs, and in 1998, the Lox released their debut studio album, Money, Power & Respect. The album was both a commercial and critical success, peaking at number 3 on the Billboard 200 and number 1 on the US Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums chart, and went on to achieve platinum status. Though the record was successful, The Lox grew unhappy with Bad Boy and Puff Daddy's glossy, radio friendly production, feeling it conflicted with their grimier street aesthetic. Following the release of their debut album, the group left the label to sign with Ruff Ryders. They released their second album, We Are The Streets, in 2000, through Ruff Ryders. The album was once again a success, peaking at number 5 on the Billboard 200 and number 2 on the US Top R&B/Hip Hop Albums chart. It featured production from Swizz Beatz and Timbaland, and spawned one single, "Ryde or Die, Bitch", featuring fellow Ruff Ryders artist Eve.


=== 2001–2007: Solo career ===
Jadakiss began embarking on a solo career in 2001 and his debut album, Kiss Tha Game Goodbye, was released in August 2001 on the Ruff Ryders/Interscope label. The album featured popular guests and producers such as DJ Premier, The Alchemist, DMX, Eve, Snoop Dogg, Nas and Swizz Beatz and was commercially successful, going on to be certified gold by the RIAA and selling over 200,000 copies during its first week of release. Despite commercial success, the album received negative reception from critics who criticised the album for being repetitive and uninspired.  Jadakiss has acknowledged the criticism as valid, saying the record was done less out of inspiration but rather out of contractual obligations to Bad Boy. The album produced three singles, "We Gonna Make It" featuring Styles P, "Knock Yourself Out" and "Put Ya Hands Up". Jadakiss followed this album with Kiss of Death, released in June 2004. It features guest appearances from Snoop Dogg, Eminem, The Lox, Kanye West, Pharrell Williams, Nate Dogg, DJ Quik and more. His song "Why?", featuring Anthony Hamilton and produced by Havoc of Mobb Deep, became one of the year's biggest hits, spawning a remix featuring Styles P, Common and Nas. "Why?" remains Jadakiss' biggest hit, peaking at #11 on the Billboard Hot 100. The song also garnered controversy for a line in which Jadakiss claims that he believes George W. Bush planned the 9/11 terrorist attacks. Another single from the record, "U Make Me Wanna," featuring Mariah Carey peaked at number 21 on the Billboard Hot 100. The album was both a commercial and critical success, receiving better reviews than his previous album and debuted at number 1 on both the Billboard 200 and the Top R&B/Hip Hop Albums charts. In late 2007, Jadakiss signed to Jay-Z's Roc-A-Fella Records, a move Jay had been trying to arrange for a long time. The move came on the heels of increased D-Block/Roc-a-Fella collaborations; in 2006, Jadakiss and former rival Beanie Sigel collaborated on DJ Khaled's album Listennn... the Album, and in 2007, on Freeway's album Free At Last. Styles P appeared on a radio freestyle with Freeway and Sigel, and also appeared briefly in the video for Jay-Z's American Gangster single "Roc Boys," in which he throws up the famous Roc-a-Fella sign, "the Diamond."


=== 2009–2015: The Last Kiss and Top 5 Dead or Alive ===
In 2009, Jadakiss released his much-delayed and anticipated third studio album, The Last Kiss. The first single, "By My Side" featuring Ne-Yo was released in October 2008. Two more singles, "Can't Stop Me" and "Death Wish" featuring Lil Wayne, were released in 2009. One more single, "Who's Real", featuring Swizz Beatz and OJ Da Juiceman released later that year. In 2010, Jadakiss left Roc-A-Fella records. In 2011, he was featured on two DJ Khaled tracks, one of them titled "It Ain't Over Til It's Over", featuring Mary J. Blige and Fabolous, and the remix of "Welcome to My Hood," also featuring Ludacris, Busta Rhymes, Twista, Mavado, Birdman, Ace Hood, Fat Joe, Game, Bun B and Waka Flocka Flame. On April 26, 2012, Jadakiss released his mixtape Consignment, hosted by DJ Drama.On June 4, 2013, Jadakiss released the first single from his by then upcoming fourth studio album, Top 5, Dead or Alive titled "Big Boy Dialogue", featuring vocals from The-Dream. The album was scheduled to be released during September or October 2013, but after much delay, the album was finally released on November 20, 2015. It features guest appearances from Akon, Future, Jeezy, Lil Wayne, Ne-Yo, Nas, Nipsey Hussle, Styles P, Puff Daddy, Sheek Louch, Swizz Beatz, Wiz Khalifa and Young Buck, and was supported by 2 singles, "Jason" featuring Swizz Beatz, and Ain't Nothin' New featuring Ne-Yo and Nipsey Hussle. The album debuted at number 4 on the Billboard 200, and received positive reviews from critics.


=== 2016–present: The Lox reunion, Friday on Elm Street, Ignatius and "Mr. Verzuz" ===
In 2016, The Lox released their first album in 16 years, title "Filthy America…It's Beautiful". The album featured guest appearances from Fetty Wap, Mobb Deep and Gucci Mane, and peaked at number 42 on the Billboard 200.On February 29, 2016, Fabolous posted a picture on Instagram with Jadakiss with the caption, "Freddy vs. Jason coming soon", hinting at the release of a joint project with Jadakiss, titled Freddy vs. Jason. On April 2, 2016, Fabolous and Jadakiss released a freestyle of Future's "Wicked" from Purple Reign that was scheduled appear on Freddy vs. Jason, but did not make the final cut of the album. They also revealed that it would not be a mixtape, but instead a full album. On October 31, 2017, the album's first and only single, "Stand Up" featuring Future was released. On November 21, 2017, it was announced that the album title was changed to Friday on Elm Street. The album was released on November 24, 2017, and features guest appearances from Future, Jeezy, Styles P, French Montana and Yo Gotti.
On March 6, 2020, Jadakiss's fifth studio album Ignatius was released. On June 29 of the same year, Jadakiss defeated Fabolous in a battle on Timbaland and Swizz Beatz' Verzuz held virtually because of the COVID-19 pandemic. The following year, Jadakiss returned for another Verzuz battle, this time alongside the Lox against The Diplomats (DipSet) live with an audience at the Hulu Theater at Madison Square Garden. The Lox were widely regarded as winning decisively, with decisive moments including Jadakiss calling out the Diplomats for using full songs including their own vocals instead of TV tracks and then performing his freestyle over The Notorious B.I.G.'s "Who Shot Ya?", originally released on his 2010 mixtape The Champ Is Here, Pt. 3, and answering Cam'ron's remark before performing "Welcome to New York City" that the Lox did not have a New York record that could not beat it  with his verse on "New York" (Jadakiss also performed the verse when Fat Joe – who was in the audience for the Lox-Diplomats Verzuz – and Ja Rule faced each other in the subsequent Verzuz at the same venue).
Following their victory, streams of Lox music increased by 215%, including Jadakiss' "Who Shot Ya?" freestyle (both studio and live versions) being added to the iTunes Store and Apple Music 11 years after its initial release. Jadakiss was also dubbed "Mr. Verzuz" after becoming the first artist to win two battles and was able to restructure his Def Jam contract. Just over a year after the battle while they were performing at LL Cool J's Rock The Bells festival at Forest Hills Stadium in Queens, Jadakiss presented Styles P and Sheek Louch with Lox championship rings and unveiled his.


== Business ventures ==
Along with longtime friend and business associate, Jay Jackson and Jadakiss launched an online multimedia creative collective called SoRaspy that also serves as an umbrella company for his business endeavors which include an online publication, record label, apparel, and a YouTube channel.Reinvesting in their community, in the summer of 2014, Jadakiss and Styles P opened a juice bar in Yonkers, New York, called Juices For Life. Together, they have gone on to open two more branches in The Bronx and one in Brooklyn.In October 2022, Jadakiss launched a family-owned coffee company called Kiss Café with his father and son.


== Personal life ==


=== Legal issues ===
On July 5, 2004, Jadakiss was arrested in North Carolina on marijuana and illicit gun possession charges. Several months later, he reached a plea agreement on misdemeanor charges and was ordered to pay a $900 fine.On October 7, 2006, Jadakiss was once again arrested in his hometown of Yonkers, New York on gun and drug possession charges. A Yonkers Police Department spokesperson said Jadakiss was one of four men sitting in a 2006 Toyota Camry that was parked near the intersection of Nepperhan Avenue and Elm Street in Yonkers at around 5 a.m. Saturday. Officers said the vehicle's driver was behaving oddly and said they noticed a strong odor of marijuana while approaching the car. Inside the vehicle, police found a .38 caliber revolver that had been reported stolen. According to The Associated Press, the weapon was loaded. All occupants were charged with possession of a stolen firearm; Jadakiss was also charged with possession of marijuana (a small amount was found on his person). The driver, Darnell Frazier, was charged with driving under the influence. The other two men in the vehicle are listed as Benjamin Lockhart and Kristian Smith. All were remanded to Westchester County Jail and were held until at least Tuesday of the following week, when they were due in court.


=== House raid ===
Police arrested two men on multiple felony charges after they raided Jadakiss' Yonkers, New York apartment and found heroin (5 grams) and marijuana (6.5 pounds). Jadakiss was neither present during the investigation, nor wanted by the law enforcement agencies. The incident took place on the morning of August 24, 2009, and started when an investigation revealed the presence of marijuana inside the vehicle driven by two men. Both men were reportedly in police custody and had been criminally charged.


== Controversy ==


=== 50 Cent ===
In 2004, Jadakiss and Fat Joe were featured on a song by Ja Rule titled "New York". In this song, Ja Rule accuses 50 Cent of being a snitch, and also takes shots at G-Unit. In turn, 50 Cent released a song titled "Piggy Bank" in which he disses Fat Joe and Jadakiss among others for performing on the song.  This caused Jadakiss to release numerous 50 Cent diss tracks, including "Checkmate", "Problem Child", "Shots Fired" and "I'm Sorry Ms. Jackson". 50 Cent along with his G-Unit crew responded with songs such as "I Run New York", "Window Shopper", and "Death Wish" by Lloyd Banks. Jadakiss challenged 50 Cent to an onstage battle in Madison Square Garden for 1 million dollars, but 50 Cent declined. The feud was later resolved, with Jadakiss and G-Unit performing together at 50 Cent's ThisIs50 Festival on October 3, 2009.


=== Bill O'Reilly ===
In 2004, Bill O'Reilly called Jadakiss a "smear merchant" due to lyrics in his hit song "Why?", in which Jadakiss lyrically implied George W. Bush coordinated the September 11 attacks, with the line "Why do niggas push pounds of powder? Why did Bush knock down the towers?" Jadakiss said the line was a metaphor for Bush administration not doing enough to stop the attacks.In the music video for "Why?", a man holds up a picket sign reading "Buck Fush" (a spoonerism of "Fuck Bush"). O'Reilly took the position that the President should be allowed to sue Jadakiss for slander. The track was eventually banned on some radio stations or played with the lyrics in question censored.


== Discography ==

Studio albums

Kiss tha Game Goodbye (2001)
Kiss of Death (2004)
The Last Kiss (2009)
Top 5 Dead or Alive (2015)
Ignatius (2020)Collaboration albums

Friday on Elm Street (with Fabolous)  (2017)


== See also ==
The Lox
Ruff Ryders


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website
Jadakiss at AllMusic 
Jadakiss' SoRaspyChevon Young (born 1979), better known by the stage name Ms. Jade is an American rapper from Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.In 2002 she released her only album to date, Girl Interrupted, which featured the singles "Big Head", "Feel The Girl" and "Ching Ching".
In 2008, she released new music on her Myspace page, including "Cha Cha 2008" and "A Millie Freestyle". In 2009 she was featured in an interview with newfreemixtape.com, discussing her comeback.
She also was featured on Beyoncé's official remix to her hit single, "Diva", with Ciara.
In 2010 she released a video for her single "Blowin' Up" featuring Freeway. It is to be the first single from her new mixtape, "Str8 No Chaser".


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===
Girl Interrupted (2002)


=== Singles ===


== References ==Mike Jaggerr (born August 20, 1989) is a rapper, producer, and songwriter and former band member of the hip-hop group Bassline.  Mike was born in New York, raised in Wilmington, Delaware and currently resides in Brooklyn, NY.  Mike is also a graduate from Florida’s Full Sail University and studied film.


== The Eleventh Hour ==
Mike has released his debut mixtape titled The Eleventh Hour (January 11, 2011) where he served as the exclusive producer, rapper and singer.  The mixtape release party was celebrated February 4, 2011 in Wilmington, Delaware and TheWakeUpShow/MTV’s Sway was host.  Mike also performed, February 8, 2011, at New York’s Art Center during the Faces in the Crowd showcase.
Its lead single is "Away", which is an opening and introductory song about his family and troubled childhood.  Mike raps, "Promised my Pop I wouldn’t cry a tear / but sometimes I get so tired, Goodyear / name the last time I had a good year with no dysfunction / guess it’s my curse conjunction / to stay in this pain of world I know / got so much pain I got to let it show/but I can’t live like this I got to let it go".
A video has been shot by the productive team Creative Control for "Away", who have also produced for Kanye West, Erykah Badu, and Curren$y.  A fellow buzz track has been Mike's collaboration with Def Jam’s Big K.R.I.T. for "Cruise Control".  The tastemaker website DJBooth.net exclusively posted "Cruise Control" as well as XXLmag.com, VIBE.com, and DJ Mick Boogie chose the song as his "jam of the week".
The mixtape The Eleventh Hour has received Internet recognition and sponsorship from influential blogs and websites such as AllHipHop where they stated in reference to his story; "Often times it is through the story of others that we learn more about ourselves.  Regardless of the relevance, there are simply those aspects of  struggle and triumph that evoke emotion. When reading Mike Jaggerr’s 'story,'  I became excited." DJBooth.net also featured Mike's effort as did Datpiff.com, which awarded The Eleventh Hour with five stars.


== Features ==
Mike's been featured on NodFactor.com, Atlanta's AUC magazine, on BET.com and Entertainment Tonight host Kevin Frazier's HipHollywood.com.  The project has earned a 98/100 rating on ThisIsRealMusic.com.  TheSource magazine also tapped the rapper for a spotlight in their legendary Unsigned Hype column.
The Eleventh Hour has also been posted on RapRadar.com,  2DopeBoyz.com and OkayPlayer.com among others. Additionally, New York's Power 105's morning host Angela Yee tapped the set as her "Mix of the Week"KIIS-FM’s DJ Skee selected Mike Jaggerr’s single "Away" (track 27) to be included on his exclusive MetroPCS sponsored Super Bowl/NBA All-Star mixtape "Android for All", released February 20, 2011.


== References ==


== External links ==Jason William Mizell (January 21, 1965 – October 30, 2002), better known by his stage name Jam Master Jay, was an American musician and DJ. He was the DJ of the influential hip hop group Run-DMC. During the 1980s, Run-DMC became one of the biggest hip hop groups and are credited with breaking hip hop into mainstream music.


== Early life ==
Jason Mizell was born in Brooklyn, New York City, the son of Jesse Mizell and Connie Thompson Mizell (later Connie Mizell-Perry) whose other children are Marvin L. Thompson and Bonita Jones.At age three, Jason began playing trumpet. He learned to play bass, guitar, and drums. He performed at his church and in various bands prior to discovering turntablism. After he and his family moved to Hollis, Queens, New York City, in 1975 at the age of 10, he discovered the turntables and started DJing at the age of 13.  He was high school friends with Wendell "DJ Hurricane" Fite, known for his 13-year collaboration with The Beastie Boys.As a teenager, Mizell was involved with a group that committed residential burglaries. An encounter with an armed security guard frightened him into stopping the burglaries, and as an adult he was known for discouraging criminal activities among his friends and family.For a time, he lived in Atlantic City, New Jersey, where turntablism pioneer DJ Def Lou Hauck  taught him to crossfade. He caught on quickly because of his musical experience and after a year of DJing he felt that he was good enough to play in front of people. Originally calling himself Jazzy Jase, he attended high school at Andrew Jackson High School in New York City's Queens.


== Career ==
He first started playing at parks and later played at bars. He also began throwing small parties around the area. Once he got a pair of Technics 1200s, he improved rapidly, since he was able to practice at night with headphones on when he was supposed to be sleeping.Mizell became a DJ because he "just wanted to be a part of the band". Prior to joining Run-D.M.C., he played bass and drums in several garage bands. In 1982, he joined Joseph "Run" Simmons and Darryl "D.M.C." McDaniels just after they graduated from high school and agreed to DJ for them because he wanted to be part of the band. On Run-D.M.C's album Raising Hell, Mizell played keyboards, bass, and live drums in addition to his turntable work. Mizell remained in his childhood neighborhood in Hollis, Queens his entire life.
In 1989, Mizell established Jam Master Jay Records. The label is most known for signing 50 Cent and Onyx. Jam Master Jay Records folded after Jason Mizell was murdered on October 30, 2002.
Mizell's legacy includes the Scratch DJ Academy in Manhattan. Founded in 2002, the year of his death, the academy was created to "provide unparalleled education and access to the art form of the DJ and producer."


== Personal life ==
Jam Master Jay was related to the Mizell Brothers, a popular production team for Gary Bartz, Johnny "Hammond" Smith, and others.On consecutive Christmas holidays, Mizell survived a car accident and a gunshot wound to the leg, respectively. The car accident occurred in the early morning hours of December 26, 1987, in the West Village of Manhattan.Jam Master Jay was the father of three sons: Jason Mizell Jr. (who performs as DJ Jam Master J'Son), Jesse Mizell, and TJ Mizell (also a DJ), and a daughter, Tyra Myricks (born August 1992).


== Death ==
On Wednesday, October 30, 2002, at 7:30 pm, Mizell was fatally shot in New York City in his recording studio on Merrick Boulevard in Jamaica, Queens. Another person in the room, 25-year-old Urieco Rincon, was shot in the ankle and survived. Following Mizell's death, several artists expressed their grief for the loss in the hip hop community and remembered him for his influence on music and the genre. Mizell was buried at Ferncliff Cemetery and Mausoleum in Hartsdale, New York.In 2003, Kenneth McGriff, a convicted drug dealer and longtime friend of Murder Inc. Records founders Irving "Irv Gotti" Lorenzo and his older brother Christopher, were investigated for targeting Mizell because the DJ defied an industry blacklist of rapper 50 Cent that was imposed because of "Ghetto Qu'ran", a song 50 Cent wrote about McGriff's drug history.In December 2003, Playboy magazine published an article by investigative journalist Frank Owen, "The Last Days of Jam Master Jay", which traced the murder to a drug deal gone bad. Owen said he uncovered evidence Mizell, not normally involved in crime as an adult, had turned to cocaine distribution to pay mounting bills. Mizell owed substantial debts to the Internal Revenue Service, among others, after his music career stalled in the late 1990s. According to Owen, several sources indicated Mizell traveled to Washington, D.C., on July 31, 2002, to obtain 10 kilograms (22 lb) of cocaine valued at about a quarter-million dollars from a trafficker known as "Uncle". Mizell reportedly agreed to pay for the drugs in about a week. However, Mizell failed to repay Uncle, who allegedly arranged to have Mizell murdered.
In April 2007, federal prosecutors named Ronald Washington as an accomplice in the murder. Washington also is a suspect in the 1995 murder of Randy "Stretch" Walker, a former close associate of rapper Tupac Shakur, who was also murdered. According to court papers filed by the prosecution, Washington allegedly "pointed his gun at those present in the studio, ordered them to get on the ground and provided cover for his associate to shoot and kill Jason Mizell." However, he was never convicted.In 2018, Netflix released a documentary analyzing the circumstances of his murder. ReMastered: Who Killed Jam Master Jay?, the third episode of Netflix's ReMastered music documentary series, interviews several of Mizell's friends, family members and acquaintances who share stories they have heard regarding suspects in his murder. The documentary does not come to a conclusion regarding who the murderer(s) are. Also in 2018, former prosecutor Marcia Clark featured Jam Master Jay's murder in an episode of her series Marcia Clark Investigates The First 48 on A&E where she examined several scenarios and suspects for the murder. She spoke to former Run DMC road manager Darren "Big D" Jordan, who denied allegations of involvement made against him by Ronald Washington. Clark further interviewed Owen, who stood by his 2003 article as largely accurate and stated he did not know who shot Mizell but believed the murder was facilitated by Mizell's close friend Ronald Washington.


=== 2020 arrests ===
In 2020, Ronald Washington and Karl Jordan Jr. were indicted for Mizell's murder. The indictment alleges that Mizell had recently acquired 10 kilograms (22 lb) of cocaine from a distributor based in Maryland. Mizell, Washington, and Jordan had an agreement to sell the cocaine on consignment, but Mizell cut the two men out after a dispute. Washington had been considered a suspect very early in the investigation, and Jordan had been charged in August 2003 with attempted murder after shooting Mizell's nephew, Rodney Jones, in the leg.Washington and Jordan Jr. pled not guilty. In November 2021, it was announced that federal prosecutors would not seek the death penalty if they are convicted, and that prosecutors would instead seek life imprisonment without the possibility of parole. In October 2022, the trial was scheduled to begin on February 20, 2023. Prosecutors assert that Jordan Jr. admitted to the crime in a conversation. The trial is currently scheduled for November 2023.


== See also ==
List of unsolved murders


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website
Jam Master Jay at Find a Grave
Jam Master Jay discography at Discogs
Jam Master Jay discography at MusicBrainzJasiri X (born Jasiri Oronde Smith) is an American rapper and activist who gained attention for his 2007 song "Free the Jena 6." He is a recipient of the Rauschenberg Artist as Activist award and co-founder of anti-violence group 1Hood. In 2016, he was awarded an honorary doctorate from the Chicago Theological Seminary.


== Early life ==
Jasiri X was born Jasiri Oronde Smith in Chicago, Illinois. In the 1980s he moved with his mother to Monroeville, Pennsylvania and attended Gateway High School, graduating at age 16. Intending to become a lawyer, he began college at the University of Maryland, then attended the University of Pittsburgh but did not finish college.


== Career ==
After leaving school, Jasiri began spoken word, performing initially as Jo Smith. He also became an activist and was introduced to the Nation of Islam, taken by an acquaintance to a mosque in 1997. Jasiri met Louis Farrakhan a year later when Farrakhan was in Pittsburgh to support a boycott, and Jasiri subsequently registered as a member the Nation of Islam. In 2005, he became the minister of Muhammad Mosque No. 22 in Wilkinsburg.Jasiri X has created music addressing social and political issues, including his 2007 song "Free the Jena 6", "Trayvon"  following George Zimmerman's killing of Trayvon Martin in February 2012, "Do We Need to Start a Riot?" and "What if the Tea Party was Black?" He encouraged other hip-hop artists to engage these concerns as well.In 2010 he released his first album, American History X. In 2013, he released a second album, called Ascension, with Vancouver label Wandering Worx. In 2013, Jasiri X was part of a delegation of artists and activists, including labor leader Bill Fletcher and writer Dream Hampton, who visited the State of Palestine and Israel. The Carter Center funded the trip. Jasiri produced a music video for his rap song "Checkpoint," which is based on the occupation, oppression, colonialism, and discrimination he witnessed firsthand during his trip to Palestine and Israel. The video features footage Jasiri himself captured of Israeli soldiers and newsreel clips of Israel Defense Forces brutality against Palestinians.In 2015, he released Black Liberation Theology, with features from David Banner and Tef Poe among others. He has mentioned Nas, Wu-Tang Clan, Mobb Deep, Lauryn Hill, Tupac, the Notorious B.I.G., Public Enemy, and KRS-One as among his musical influences.Jasiri X also has a YouTube-based show "This Week with Jasiri X" and has been an advocate for net neutrality particularly as it relates to protecting access for low-income people of color.In 2006, he cofounded the anti-violence group 1Hood, which includes a media academy teaching young black boys to analyze media as well as create their own.


=== Awards and grants ===
2015 "Artist as Activist" fellowship at the Robert Rauschenberg Foundation
2015 USA Fellow, a $50,000 award from United States Artists for "innovative, accomplished artists...for their fresh perspectives, unique artistic vision, and impact on their field"
2015 commission from the Open Society Foundation to create a film on the effects of the drug war on South America
2016 honorary doctorate from the Chicago Theological Seminary


== See also ==
Conscious hip-hop
Black Lives Matter


== References ==


== External links ==
Jasiri X
1Hood
Interview with Jasiri X on Politically Re-Active with W. Kamau Bell and Hari KondaboluShawn Corey Carter (born December 4, 1969), known by his stage name  Jay-Z, is an American rapper, record producer, and entrepreneur. Known for his involvement in the creative and commercial success of numerous artists, he was named the greatest rapper of all time by Billboard and Vibe in 2023. He is the founder and chairman of entertainment company Roc Nation, and was the president and chief executive officer of Def Jam Recordings from 2004 to 2007.Born and raised in New York City, Jay-Z began his musical career in the late 1980s; he co-founded the record label Roc-A-Fella Records in 1994 and released his debut studio album Reasonable Doubt in 1996, which was met with critical praise. He has went on to release twelve additional albums to further critical acclaim and commercial success, including The Blueprint (2001), The Black Album (2003), American Gangster (2007), and 4:44 (2017). He released the collaborative albums Watch the Throne with Kanye West in 2011 and Everything Is Love with his wife Beyoncé in 2018. Jay-Z holds the record for the most number-one albums (14) of any solo artist on the Billboard 200.Through his business ventures, Jay-Z became the first hip-hop billionaire in 2019. In 1999, he founded Rocawear, a clothing retailer. In 2003, he founded 40/40 Club, a luxury bar chain. Both businesses grew to multi-million-dollar corporations, enabling him to launch Roc Nation, a multi-disciplinary entertainment agency in 2008. In 2015, he acquired the technology company Aspiro and led the expansion of Tidal, the company's media streaming service. As of 2023, he is the wealthiest musical artist in the world with a net worth of US$2.5 billion.One of the world's best-selling music artists with 140 million records sold, Jay-Z has won 24 Grammy Awards, the tenth-most of all time and most awarded for any hip hop artist jointly with Kanye West. He has been awarded the NAACP's President's Award, a Primetime Emmy Award, a Sports Emmy Award, been nominated for a Tony Award. Ranked by Billboard and Rolling Stone as one of the 100 greatest artists of all time, Jay-Z was the first rapper to be inducted into the Songwriters Hall of Fame and the first solo living rapper inducted in the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. Time named him one of the 100 most influential people in the world in 2013.


== Early life and education ==
Shawn Corey Carter was born on December 4, 1969, in Brooklyn, New York City. He was raised in Marcy Houses, a public housing project in Brooklyn's Bedford–Stuyvesant neighborhood. His father, Adnis Reeves, abandoned the family, and Jay-Z and his three older siblings were raised by his mother, Gloria Carter. Reeves later met and reconciled with Jay-Z prior to his father's death in 2003. Jay-Z claims in his lyrics that in 1982, at age 12, he shot his older brother in the shoulder for stealing his jewelry.He attended Eli Whitney High School and George Westinghouse Career and Technical Education High School, both in Brooklyn, and then Trenton Central High School in Trenton, New Jersey. He did not graduate, dropping out during his sophomore year at Trenton Central High School. According to his interviews and lyrics, he sold crack cocaine and was shot at three times during this period. His former friend was sentenced to prison for possessing drugs and weapons.According to his mother, Jay-Z used to wake up his siblings at night banging out drum patterns on the kitchen table. She bought him a boombox for his birthday, sparking his interest in music, and he began freestyling and writing lyrics. Known as "Jazzy" around the neighborhood, he later adopted the stage name "Jay-Z" in homage to his mentor Jaz-O.


== Career ==
Jay-Z can be briefly heard on several of Jaz-O's early recordings in the late 1980s and early 1990s, including "H. P. Gets Busy", "The Originators" and "Hawaiian Sophie". Jay-Z became embroiled in several battles with rapper LL Cool J in the early 1990s. He first became known to a wide audience on the posse cut "Show and Prove" on the 1994 Big Daddy Kane album Daddy's Home. Jay-Z has been referred to as Big Daddy Kane's hype man during this period, although Kane explains that he did not fill the traditional hype man role, and was instead basically making cameo appearances on stage. "When I would leave the stage to go change outfits, I would bring out Jay-Z and Positive K and let them freestyle until I came back to the stage."According to his second verse on "99 Problems", released in 2003, Jay-Z was allegedly stopped by an NYPD detective in 1994 while en route to I-95, possibly for a search of drugs in his car. Detection dogs were called, but another police car had passed; Jay-Z was let go soon after. Jay-Z appeared on a popular song by Big L, "Da Graveyard", and on Mic Geronimo's "Time to Build", which also featured early appearances by his former Murder Inc. colleagues Ja Rule and DMX in 1995. His first official rap single was "In My Lifetime", which was released with an accompanying music video in 1995. An unreleased music video was also produced for the B-side "I Can't Get with That."


=== 1995–2000: Reasonable Doubt, In My Lifetime, Vol. 1, Vol. 2..., Vol. 3..., and The Dynasty ===
With no major label to give him a record deal, Jay-Z sold burned CDs out of his car, and with Damon "Dame" Dash and Kareem "Biggs" Burke, created Roc-A-Fella Records as an independent label in 1995. After striking a distribution deal with Priority, Jay-Z released his 1996 debut album Reasonable Doubt with beats from acclaimed producers such as DJ Premier and Super DJ Clark Kent and an appearance by The Notorious B.I.G. The album reached number 23 on the Billboard 200, and was generally favored by critics. This album would later be included in Rolling Stone's 500 Greatest Albums of All Time as No. 248 and eventually reach platinum status. After reaching a new label distribution deal with Def Jam in 1997, Jay-Z released his follow-up In My Lifetime, Vol. 1. Featuring production by Sean "Puff Daddy" Combs, DJ Premier, and Ski, it earned platinum status in the United States.In 1998, Jay-Z released Vol. 2... Hard Knock Life which spawned the biggest hit of his career at the time, "Hard Knock Life (Ghetto Anthem)". He relied more on flow and wordplay, and he continued with his penchant for mining beats from the popular producers of the day such as Swizz Beatz, an upstart in-house producer for Ruff Ryders, and Timbaland. Other producers included DJ Premier, Erick Sermon, The 45 King, and Kid Capri. Charting hits from this album included "Can I Get A...", featuring Ja Rule and Amil, and "Nigga What, Nigga Who", featuring Amil and Jaz-O. Vol. 2 would eventually become Jay-Z's most commercially successful album; it was certified 5× Platinum in the United States and has to date sold over five million copies. The album went on to win a Grammy Award, although Jay-Z boycotted the ceremony protesting DMX's failure to garner a Grammy nomination and the academy's decision to not broadcast urban music categories. 
In 1999, Jay-Z collaborated with Mariah Carey on "Heartbreaker", a song from her seventh album, Rainbow. The song became Jay-Z's first chart-topper in the US, spending two weeks atop the Billboard Hot 100. In that same year, Jay-Z released Vol. 3... Life and Times of S. Carter. The album proved successful and sold over 3 million copies. Vol. 3's most successful single was "Big Pimpin", featuring UGK.
In 2000, Jay-Z released The Dynasty: Roc La Familia, which was originally intended to become a compilation album for Roc-A-Fella artists but Def Jam turned into a Jay-Z album. The album helped to introduce newcomer producers The Neptunes, Just Blaze, Kanye West, and Bink, which have all gone on to achieve notable success. This is also the first album where Jay-Z utilizes a more soulful sound than his previous albums. The Dynasty sold over two million units in the U.S. alone.


=== 2001–2002: Feud with Nas, The Blueprint and The Blueprint2 ===
In 2001, Jay-Z spoke out against Prodigy after he took an issue with a Jay-Z line from "Money, Cash, Hoes" that he felt alluded disparagingly to Mobb Deep and Prodigy's dispute with Tupac Shakur, Snoop Dogg, and Death Row Records. He later performed the song "Takeover", at Summer Jam 2001, which initially attacked Prodigy and revealed photos of Prodigy dressed like Michael Jackson. A line at the end of "Takeover" referred to Nas, who criticized him on "We Will Survive". Nas responded with a diss track called "Ether" and Jay-Z straightaway added a verse to "Takeover" which dissed Nas and would start a feud between the two rappers. The feud had ended by 2005, Jay-Z stated Mark Pitts had helped them settle the feud.On September 11, 2001, Jay-Z released his sixth studio album, The Blueprint, which received a five-mic review from hip-hop magazine The Source. Written in just two days, the album sold more than 427,000 copies, debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 and reached 2× Platinum status in the U.S. Eminem featured on the album, producing and rapping on the song "Renegade". Four tracks were produced by Kanye West. The Blueprint includes the songs "Izzo (H.O.V.A.)", "Girls, Girls, Girls", "Jigga That Nigga", and "Song Cry". As of February 2012, the album had sold 2.7 million copies worldwide. In 2019, The Blueprint was selected by the Library of Congress for preservation in the National Recording Registry for being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".In October 2001, Jay-Z pleaded guilty to aggravated assault for stabbing record producer Lance Rivera at the Kit Kat Klub in New York City in 1999. For this second-degree felony, Jay-Z was sentenced to three years probation.In 2002, Jay-Z released his seventh studio album The Blueprint2: The Gift & The Curse, a double album. The album debuted on the Billboard 200 at number one, selling over 3 million units in the U.S. alone and surpassing The Blueprint. It was later reissued in a single-disc version, The Blueprint 2.1, which retained half of the tracks from the original. The album spawned two hit singles, "Excuse Me Miss" and "'03 Bonnie & Clyde", which features Jay-Z's wife, Beyoncé. The album also contained the tracks "A Dream", featuring Faith Evans and the late The Notorious B.I.G..


=== 2003–2005: The Black Album and initial retirement ===
After visiting the south of France, Jay-Z announced work on his eighth studio album The Black Album at the opening of the 40/40 Club. He worked with several producers including Just Blaze, The Neptunes, Kanye West, Timbaland, Eminem, DJ Quik, 9th Wonder, The Buchanans, and Rick Rubin. Notable songs on the album included "What More Can I Say", "Dirt Off Your Shoulder", "Change Clothes", and "99 Problems". The Black Album has sold more than 3 million copies in the U.S. Jay-Z collaborated with R. Kelly and released a collaborative studio album, The Best of Both Worlds.
On November 25, 2003, Jay-Z held a concert—billed as a "retirement party" at Madison Square Garden in New York City, which would later be the focus of his film Fade to Black. All proceeds went to charity. Other performers included collaborators like the Roots (in the form of his backing band), Missy Elliott, Memphis Bleek, Beanie Siegel, Freeway, Mary J. Blige, Beyoncé, Twista, Ghostface Killah, Foxy Brown, Pharrell Williams and R. Kelly with special appearances by Voletta Wallace and Afeni Shakur, the mothers of The Notorious B.I.G. and Tupac Shakur, respectively. While Jay-Z had attested to a retirement from making new studio albums, various side projects and appearances soon followed. Included in these were a greatest hits record, as well as the release and tour of Unfinished Business, the second collaborative album between Jay-Z and R. Kelly.
In 2004, Jay-Z collaborated with rock group Linkin Park, in which they released their collaborative remix EP Collision Course, which featured mashups of both artists' songs, as well as a concert DVD. The album's only single, "Numb/Encore", went on to win a Grammy for Best Rap/Sung Collaboration, and was performed with Linkin Park live at the Grammys, with a special appearance by Paul McCartney, who added verses from the song "Yesterday". The EP sold over 1 million copies in the U.S. Jay-Z was the executive producer of The Rising Tied, the debut album of Fort Minor, the hip hop side project of Linkin Park rapper Mike Shinoda. Jay-Z also planned to retire in 2004.Later in 2004, Jay-Z was named president of Def Jam Records, which led to Jay-Z, Dash and Biggs selling their remaining interests in Roc-A-Fella Records and Jay-Z taking control of both of the companies. Reportedly this major industry move was prompted by disagreements between Jay-Z and Dash as to what direction Roc-A-Fella could undertake. The publicized split between Jay-Z, Dash, and Biggs led to the former partners sending jabs at each other in interviews.


=== 2005–2007: Kingdom Come and American Gangster ===
On October 27, 2005, Jay-Z headlined New York's Power 105.1 annual concert, Powerhouse. The concert was entitled the "I Declare War" concert leading to intense speculation in the weeks preceding the event on whom exactly Jay-Z would declare war. As he had previously "declared war" on other artists taking lyrical shots at him at other events, many believed that the Powerhouse show would represent an all-out assault by Jay-Z upon his rivals. The theme of the concert was Jay-Z's position as president and CEO of Def Jam, complete with an on-stage mock-up of the Oval Office. Many artists made appearances such as the old roster of Roc-A-Fella records artists, as well as Ne-Yo, Teairra Marí, T.I., Young Jeezy, Akon, Kanye West, Paul Wall, The LOX, and Diddy.At the conclusion of the concert, Jay-Z put many arguments to rest to the surprise of hip hop fans. The most significant development in this show was closure to the infamous hip hop rivalry between Jay-Z and Nas. The two former rivals shook hands and shared the stage together to perform Jay-Z's "Dead Presidents" blended with Nas's song "The World is Yours".Jay-Z returned with his comeback album on November 21, 2006, titled Kingdom Come. Jay-Z's comeback single, "Show Me What You Got", was leaked on the Internet in early October 2006, scheduled to be released later on that month, received heavy air-play after its leak, causing the FBI to step in and investigate. Jay-Z worked with video director Hype Williams, and the single's video was directed by F. Gary Gray. The album features production from Just Blaze, Pharrell, Kanye West, Dr. Dre and Coldplay's Chris Martin (single entitled "Beach Chair"). The first week saw 680,000 sales of the CD, which Entertainment Weekly said was "the highest single-week total in Jay's decade long career". This album has sold 2 million copies in the U.S.Jay-Z released his tenth album entitled American Gangster on November 6, 2007. After viewing the Ridley Scott film of the same name, Jay-Z was heavily inspired to create a new "concept" album that depicts his experiences as a street-hustler.
The album is not the film's official soundtrack, although it was distributed by Def Jam.
Jay-Z's American Gangster depicts his life in correlation to the movie American Gangster. At the start of the album's first single, "Blue Magic", Jay-Z offers a dealer's manifesto while making references to political figures of the late 1980s with the lyric: "Blame Reagan for making me to into a monster, blame Oliver North and Iran-Contra, I ran contraband that they sponsored, before this rhymin' stuff we was in concert." Also notable about the "Blue Magic" music video was Jay-Z flashing €500 notes; Harvard Business School professor Rawi Abdelal called this a "turning point in American pop culture's response to globalization." The album has sold 1 million copies in the U.S. On January 1, 2008, Jay-Z resigned as president of Def Jam.


=== 2008–2011: The Blueprint 3 and Watch the Throne ===
In winter 2008, it was announced that Jay-Z would become the first major hip hop artist to headline Britain's Glastonbury Festival. Tickets sold out quickly. Former headliner Noel Gallagher of Oasis condemned the festival organizers for choosing Jay-Z to headline a traditionally guitar-driven festival. "I'm sorry, but Jay-Z?" Gallagher asked, swearing. "No chance. Glastonbury has a tradition of, kind of, guitar music, do you know what I mean? And even when they throw the odd curve balls in on a Sunday night—you go, 'Kylie Minogue? I don't know about that', do you know what I mean?—but I'm not having hip hop at Glastonbury, no way, no, no. It's wrong." As controversy mounted, Jay-Z replied, "We don't play guitars, Noel, but hip hop has put in its work like any other form of music. This headline show is just a natural progression. Rap music is still evolving. We have to respect each other's genre of music and move forward." Jay-Z opened his Glastonbury set with a tongue-in-cheek cover of Oasis's iconic song "Wonderwall", and went on to deliver a performance heralded as a successful response to pre-festival criticism.He also headlined many other summer festivals in 2008, including Roskilde Festival in Denmark, Hove Festival in Norway and O2 Wireless Festival in London. During Kanye West's concert of August 6, 2008, at Madison Square Garden, Jay-Z came out to perform a new song and he and West proclaimed that it was to be on The Blueprint 3. On May 21, 2009, Jay-Z announced he would be parting ways with Def Jam, and had struck a multi-million-dollar deal to sign with Live Nation, with whom he would start his Roc Nation imprint which would serve as a record label, talent/management agency, and music publishing company and also partnered with production team Stargate to start a record label called StarRoc. Jay-Z's 11th studio album The Blueprint 3 was originally to be released on September 11, 2009, but was instead released in North America on September 8, 2009, due to increasing anticipation. Its international release followed on September 14. It is his 11th album to reach No. 1 on the Billboard 200 and has surpassed Elvis Presley's previous record, making him the current solo-artist record holder. On October 9, 2009, Jay-Z kicked off his tour for The Blueprint 3, during which he supported his new album in North America. In a Shave Magazine review of his performance at Rexall Place in Edmonton, Jake Tomlinson expressed that "It was the type of smooth performance you would expect from the hip-hop superstar." The review gave this performance 4 stars. His North American tour continued until November 22, 2009. At his concert on November 8, 2009, at UCLA's Pauley Pavilion, Rihanna joined him on stage and performed "Hard" for the first time, then performed "Run This Town" with Jay-Z. Among his success, Jay-Z has ventured into producing Broadway shows. Along with Jada Pinkett Smith and Will Smith, Jay-Z helped produce the play Fela!, a musical celebrating the work of the late Nigerian star Fela Kuti. Jay-Z said he was inspired by the power of Kuti's work and his life story, which resulted in his interest to help produce the musical. Fela! is a story about an African pioneer and political activist who made his first moves on the scene during the 1970s.
On January 23, 2010, Jay-Z released a track, "Stranded (Haiti Mon Amour)", with Rihanna, and U2's Bono and The Edge, as well as performing it at the Hope For Haiti Now telethon. In June 2010, Eminem and Jay-Z announced they would perform together in a pair of concerts in Detroit and New York. The event was dubbed The Home & Home Tour. The first two concerts rapidly sold out, prompting the scheduling of an additional show at each venue. Jay-Z was the supporting act for U2 on the Australian and New Zealand leg of their U2 360° Tour, beginning in Auckland, New Zealand, in November 2010, followed by Melbourne, Sydney, Brisbane and Perth in December. Jay-Z also appeared on stage during U2 performances of "Sunday Bloody Sunday", and in Auckland also on a five-track EP entitled Watch the Throne, although it was later revealed by West that the project had become a full-length LP. Recording sessions for the album took place at various recording locations and began in November 2010. The first single released for the project was "H•A•M". The track was co-produced by Lex Luger and West himself. The track ended up being on the deluxe edition of the album. The follow-up to that was the second single "Otis", which premiered on Funkmaster Flex's Hot 97 radio show, and was later released to the iTunes Store eleven days later. The song's existence, along with several other tracks from the album, was confirmed during a listening session hosted by Jay-Z. The album was first released on the iTunes Store, five days prior to its being released in physical format, a strategy Jay-Z later said was used to block an internet leak. It debuted at No. 1 on the iTunes Store in 23 countries. It also broke Coldplay's record for most albums sold in one week on the online retailer, selling 290,000 copies on iTunes alone. It held that record until Lil Wayne's Tha Carter IV was released twenty-one days later, selling 10,000 copies more. It debuted on the U.S. Billboard 200 chart at No. 1, selling 436,000 copies in its first week. The album received generally positive reviews. Jay-Z and West later gave a surprise performance of "Otis" at the 2011 MTV Video Music Awards.


=== 2012–2016: Magna Carta Holy Grail and other ventures ===
Jay-Z collaborated with M.I.A on her single "XXXO", which achieved a fair level of success and went on to become remixed by several producers worldwide. In May 2012, Jay-Z and former Philadelphia mayor Michael A. Nutter announced Jay-Z as the curator and the headliner for the first annual "Budweiser Made in America" festival at Fairmount Park in Philadelphia on September 1 and 2, 2012. The performance was produced by Live Nation and assembled an eclectic lineup of "rock, hip hop, R&B, Latin music and dance" musicians. Jay-Z and Rihanna were the two main headlining acts for BBC Radio 1's 2012 Hackney Weekend music festival on June 23 to 24. Jay-Z opened his set with an appearance from Rihanna, they performed "Run this Town". On September 6, "Clique" was released, a single from the album "Cruel Summer", by GOOD Music. Kanye West and Big Sean starred alongside Jay-Z on the track. Jay-Z took the subway to his sold-out show at The Barclays Center on October 6, 2012. On November 12, 2012, Coldplay announced that they will be playing with Jay-Z at the Barclays Center in Brooklyn on December 31.On September 23, 2010, Q-Tip confirmed working on Jay-Z's follow-up album to The Blueprint 3, saying the album was to hit stores by spring 2011. In May 2012 it was reported that Jay-Z would work on new music with Roc Nation producer Jahlil Beats. Beats told XXL magazine: "Me and Jay-Z been going back and forth. He picked a couple of my joints that he's working on. I don't even wanna say too much about Jay, but we definitely working on some stuff. I haven't even sent him a bunch of beats. I sent him my favorite stuff. He hit me right back like, 'Yo, I'ma go in on this,' or, 'I like this.'" The album has been named one of the most anticipated albums of 2013 by Complex Magazine, MTV, and XXL. Production will come from Jahlil Beats, Kanye West, Rick Rubin, Swizz Beatz, Timbaland, and Pharrell Williams. Jay-Z also made an appearance on Justin Timberlake's comeback single "Suit & Tie" from his third studio album The 20/20 Experience, the song itself was produced by both Jay-Z and Timberlake's mutual friend, Timbaland. Timberlake and Jay-Z embarked on the co-headlining Legends of the Summer Stadium Tour. During the fifth game of the 2013 NBA Finals, Carter announced his twelfth studio album, Magna Carta Holy Grail, and was released on July 4, 2013. Not long after, Jay-Z confirmed that the hyphen in his stage name would be left out and officially stylized in all capital letters. Magna Carta Holy Grail debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 and sold 528,000 copies in its first week, which bypassed its predicted debut in the range of 350,000 to 400,000.
In December 2013, it was announced that Jay-Z had received nine nominations at the 2014 Grammy Awards, more than any other artist. Jay-Z appeared on his wife Beyoncé's self-titled fifth studio album, Beyoncé, with a feature on the song "Drunk in Love". They performed this song together at the 56th Annual Grammy Awards opening. The song and its accompanying album would later win three Grammy Awards including Best R&B Performance at the 2015 ceremony.
In 2016, he won a lawsuit for the song "Made in America" with Kanye West featuring Frank Ocean against Joel McDonald.


=== 2017–present: 4:44 and Everything Is Love ===
In early June 2017, posters were displayed in New York City and Los Angeles, and banner ads were placed on the Internet promoting a Tidal-related project titled 4:44. A teaser ad was aired during the NBA Finals on June 7 featuring actors Mahershala Ali, Lupita Nyong'o and Danny Glover in a one-minute video, ending in "4:44 – 6.30.17, Exclusively on Tidal". On June 18, the project was confirmed to be a new Jay-Z album, and a clip featuring a song titled "Adnis" was posted on Sprint's YouTube page.4:44 was released through Roc Nation and Universal Music Group, as an exclusive to Sprint and Tidal customers. The album is the first in a planned series of music exclusives from the Sprint–Tidal partnership. For a short time, on July 2, the album was made available for free digital download in Tidal's site. A physical edition was released on July 7, including three additional tracks. On the same day, the album was made available to other streaming platforms, such as Apple Music, Google Play Music and Amazon Music.
The album received widespread acclaim from critics, who praised its emotional and personal content. On July 5, the album was certified Platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA), in recognition of one million copies purchased by Sprint and offered to consumers as free downloads. It debuted at number one on the U.S. Billboard 200, making it Jay-Z's 13th consecutive studio album to top the chart. The album spawned two singles, the title track "4:44" and "Bam", as well as several music videos, directed by a variety of high-profile collaborators. The album received a Grammy Award nomination for Album of the Year, while the title track was nominated for Song of the Year and "The Story of O.J." was nominated for Record of the Year at the 60th Annual Grammy Awards.On June 6, 2018, Jay-Z and Beyoncé kicked-off the On the Run II Tour in Cardiff, United Kingdom. Ten days later, at their final London performance, the pair unveiled Everything Is Love, their much-awaited joint studio album, credited under the name The Carters. The pair also released the video for the album's lead single, "Apeshit", on Beyoncé's official YouTube channel. The song won two awards from eight nominations at the 2018 MTV Video Music Awards.In 2021, Jay-Z was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame along with fellow rapper LL Cool J. He also appeared on the song "Jail" on Kanye West's 2021 album Donda, which went on to win Grammy Award for Best Rap Song at the 64th Annual Grammy Awards and on the song "Love All" from Drake's 2021 album Certified Lover Boy.In 2022, his first feature was a collaboration with fellow rapper Pusha T, "Neck & Wrist" featuring Pharrell Williams from Pusha T's album, It's Almost Dry. His feature was succeeded by a four-minute guest appearance on DJ Khaled's album title track, "God Did". He also was awarded the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Variety Special (Live), as a producer for the Super Bowl LVI halftime show.


== Musical style ==


=== Influences ===
Jay-Z says his earliest exposure to music was through his parents' record collection, which was mostly of soul artists such as Marvin Gaye and Donny Hathaway. He says "I grew up around music, listening to all types of people... I'm into music that has soul in it, whether it be rap, R&B, pop music, whatever. As long as I can feel their soul through the wax, that's what I really listen to." He often uses excerpts from these artists as samples in his work, particularly in the Kanye West productions included on The Blueprint.


=== Rapping technique ===
Royce da 5'9" and Fredro Starr of Onyx both describe Jay-Z's emphasis on flow in the book How to Rap—Starr says that Jay-Z is "a master of the flow—he can flow fast, he can flow slow". The book describes how Jay-Z uses 'rests' to provide structure to a verse and how he uses 'partial linking' to add more rhymes to a verse. Jay-Z's early style is described by Vibe as "a distinctly Das EFX-type, stiggety style" on his 12" single "Can't Get With That", referring to the fast rhythms and vocal delivery of the group Das EFX. He is also known to write lyrics in his head, as described by Pusha T of Clipse in How to Rap, a style popular with many MCs such as The Notorious B.I.G., Everlast, Bobby Creekwater and Guerilla Black. Shock G of Digital Underground describes Jay-Z's live performance style, saying he "rarely breaks a sweat, and instead uses smoothness and clever wordplay to keep the audience interested and entertained". Jay-Z's fast rapping technique, also known as the "triplet rhyme", was developed during his early years of creating music with former mentor Jaz-O.


== Business career ==
Jay-Z has also established himself as a successful entrepreneur with a business empire spanning a variety of industries from clothing lines, beverages, real estate, sport teams, and record labels. In an interview, he stated that "my brands are an extension of me. They're close to me. It's not like running GM, where there's no emotional attachment."


=== Rocawear ===
Jay-Z and Damon Dash are the founders of the urban clothing brand Rocawear. Rocawear has clothing lines and accessories for men, women and children. The line was taken over by Jay-Z in early 2006 following a falling out with Dash. In March 2007, Jay-Z sold the rights to the Rocawear brand to Iconix Brand Group for $204 million. He retains his stake in the company and continues to oversee the marketing, licensing and product development.


=== Reebok ===
Jay-Z became the first rapper in Reebok's history to endorse the company's footwear, signing a three-year endorsement deal. He later appeared in a 2003 Reebok collection advertising his S. Carter Collection. Later that year, he and frenemy 50 Cent appeared in a commercial to promote their S. Carter and G-Unit footwears for the company, with a Just Blaze-produced song made for it.In 2006, Jay-Z's deal with Reebok expired with no renewal.


=== Alcoholic beverages ===
In 2014, Jay-Z invested $200 million in Armand de Brignac champagne—owned at the time by Sovereign Brands, a New York–based wine and spirits company—for a 100 percent stake, making it the second alcoholic product acquisition in his financial investment portfolio. The brand is known for its popularity with high-profile artists as being the gold bottles often referred to in media. His ties to the company date back to 2006, and he received millions of dollars per year for his association with Armand de Brignac before he bought the entire company.Jay-Z serves as co-brand director for Budweiser Select and collaborates with the company on strategic marketing programs and creative ad development. He provides direction on brand programs and ads that appear on TV, radio, print, and high-profile events.


=== Technology ===
In March 2015, Jay-Z completed the $56 million acquisition of Aspiro, a Norwegian media technology company that operates the subscription-based music streaming service Tidal, which has been in operation since October 2014. The music service was acquired through his company Project Panther Bidco Ltd. (an entity indirectly owned by Jay-Z's S. Carter Enterprises a company holding interests in leading international music, media and entertainment companies). The music service combines audio and music videos with curated editorial. The main idea of the service is to bring major revenue streams back to the music artists themselves as the idea of an artist-owned streaming platform was stated as to "restore the value to music by launching a service owned by artists." Jay-Z currently is a major shareholder in the company.In July 2015, Carter made a significant investment to JetSmarter, an app helping people book private executive plane flights. The app was built by Sergey Petrossov.


=== Music industry ===
From 2005 to 2008 Jay-Z was president of Def Jam Recordings. Under Jay-Z's leadership, Def Jam launched the successful careers of contemporary R&B singers Rihanna and Ne-Yo. At the end of 2007, after he released American Gangster, Jay-Z decided not to renew his contract as the president and CEO of Def Jam in order to start his new Live Nation venture, Roc Nation.In April 2011, it was reported that Jay-Z had outbid executives at Universal Music and Jive Records to acquire independent record label Block Starz Music.


=== Sporting business ===
For a decade (2003–2013), Jay-Z enjoyed his role as a part-owner of the Brooklyn Nets NBA team, having paid a reported $1 million for his share, which declined in value to $350,000 in April 2013, based on Forbes magazine's valuation of the team. He encouraged the team's relocation to Brooklyn's Barclays Center (from New Jersey) in the 2012–2013 season, at which point the team took on the Brooklyn Nets moniker.On April 18, 2013, Jay-Z officially announced through his Life + Times website in a press release that he would be relinquishing his ownership in the Brooklyn Nets. The shares were eventually sold to singer, rapper, actor and entrepreneur Will Pan, making Pan the first American of Taiwanese descent to own a U.S. professional sports franchise. Jay-Z's cited Pan's athletic background (he was a team captain of his high school basketball team and played in college), his multitude of musical styles, his influence in the Taiwanese American community, and his business acumen and portfolio (including being the founder and chief executive of software company Camigo Media and a co-founder of streetwear boutique N.P.C [New Project Center]), as reasons why his bid was successful.In September 2013, his stake in Barclays Center was sold for $1.5 million.On April 2, 2013, ESPN reported Jay-Z's plans to launch his own sports agency, Roc Nation Sports, with a focus on the representation of various professional athletes. The sport management group is a partnership with Creative Artists Agency.  In conjunction with the agency's launch, New York Yankees's second baseman Robinson Canó left agent Scott Boras to sign with the company. ESPN also mentioned that Jay-Z himself was planning to be a certified sports agent, first in baseball and eventually in basketball and football. In order to represent clients in basketball, he would have to give up his small share of the Brooklyn Nets.In October 2005, he was reported in English media as considering buying a stake of Arsenal F.C., an English soccer team. Through his conglomerate company Gain Global Investments Network LLC, he had an interest estimated between 2 and 7% in the Aqueduct Entertainment Group (AEG) consortium, which in January 2010 was awarded a contract to operate a 4,500-slot-machine racino at the Aqueduct Race Track. Jay-Z became interested in the project after New York Governor David Paterson who awarded the contract said there had to be an affirmative action component to the ownership. Jay-Z was initially approached by casino mogul Steve Wynn, who was also bidding on the contract. On March 9, 2010, Jay-Z and Flake withdrew from the project, and Paterson recused himself from further involvement.


=== Media ===
On April 5, 2011, Jay-Z launched the popular culture and lifestyle online magazine Life + Times. It features content that showcases his high-end tastes in clothing, appliances, and cars. The site design is aesthetically aimed at the upwardly mobile young male demographic, with sports and music-related posts accompanying those about fashion and design. Among the music content is the Decoded series, originating from Jay-Z's memoir of the same name and featuring a select rapper deciphering their own lyrics.In January 2015, after being contacted by the webzine, the DJ and radio host Funkmaster Flex revealed that he had been contacted in 2013 for a story about a digital app he made at the time, but alleged that the information was instead used to help launch the Magna Carta Samsung app for the release of Jay-Z's album of the same name. "But I was good with that. I ate that. Everybody's out here hustling", Flex reasoned to Vibe.In 2016, he signed a two-year exclusive film and TV Deal with Weinstein Company and with the deal gives them first-look options to create scripted and unscripted TV projects and film projects, and those projects were in works. As part of his deal with Weinstein company, he produced a documentary series on the life of Kalief Browder who was imprisoned for three years and committed suicide upon his release. He also addressed racial profiling and police brutality in a conscious manner.


=== Other ventures ===
Jay-Z also co-owns the 40/40 Club, an upscale sports bar that started in New York City, and has since expanded to Atlantic City and Chicago. In 2008, the 40/40 Club in Las Vegas was closed down and bought back by the hotel after attendance steadily declined. In 2005, Jay-Z became an investor in Carol's Daughter, a line of beauty products, including products for hair, skin, and hands.In 2010, he announced plans to expand his 40/40 Club sports bar chain into as many as 20 airports, joining his Roc Nation business partners, husband and wife Juan and Desiree Perez, in a deal with Delaware North.On November 16, 2010, Jay-Z published a memoir entitled Decoded. The memoir was co-signed by Dream Hampton.Parlux fragrances sued Jay-Z for $18 million for the failure of his cologne, Gold. They claim the cologne's failure is due to Jay-Z not doing social media posts and interviews about the cologne. Parlux claims they projected selling $15 million the first year, and $35 million the second, and subsequent years after the launch. The fragrance sold $14 million the first year and $6.1 million the second. Parlux lost money on the venture and have had constant returns of unsold inventory.Jay-Z collaborated with Cohiba to launch his own cigars.In August 2020, Jay-Z's Roc Nation partnered with Brooklyn's Long Island University to establish the Roc Nation School of Music, Sports & Entertainment.In November 2020, it was announced that Jay-Z would be join TPCO Holding Corp., a newly formed cannabis products company, in the role of "Chief Visionary Officer".On December 5, 2022, Jay-Z and the Roc Nation announced their partnership with Caesars Entertainment to build and operate a casino property at Times Square.


== Personal life ==
In 2002, Jay-Z and singer Beyoncé collaborated on the song "'03 Bonnie & Clyde". He also appeared on Beyoncé's hit single "Crazy in Love" as well as "That's How You Like It" from her debut album Dangerously in Love. On her second album, B'Day, he made appearances on the hits "Déjà Vu" and "Upgrade U". In the video for the latter song, she comically imitates his appearance. They kept a low profile while dating and were married on April 4, 2008. Their relationship became a matter of public record on April 22, 2008, but Beyoncé did not publicly debut her $5 million Lorraine Schwartz-designed wedding ring until the Fashion Rocks concert on September 5, 2008. They reside in an $88 million home in the Bel Air neighborhood of Los Angeles. They generally avoid discussing their relationship, and Beyoncé has stated her belief that this has helped them, while Jay-Z agreed in a People article that they do not "play with [their] relationship".In 2006, Beyoncé and Jay-Z were listed as the most powerful couple for Time magazine's 100 most influential people. In January 2009, Forbes ranked them as Hollywood's top-earning couple, with a combined total of $162 million. They made it to the top of the list the following year, with a combined total of $122 million between June 2008 and June 2009.The couple bought 27712 Pacific Coast Highway, a house in Malibu, California designed by the architect Tadao Ando, for $200 million in 2023. It established a record for the most expensive residence sold in California.At the 2011 MTV Video Music Awards, Beyoncé revealed that she was pregnant with their first child. Their daughter, Blue Ivy, was born at New York's Lenox Hill Hospital on January 7, 2012. Jay-Z released "Glory", a song dedicated to their child, through his website on January 9, 2012. The song detailed the couple's pregnancy struggles, including a miscarriage Beyoncé had suffered. Because Blue's cries were included at the end of the song and she was officially credited on the song as "B.I.C", she became the youngest person ever (at two days old) to appear on a Billboard chart when "Glory" debuted at No. 74 on Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs.On June 18, 2017, Beyoncé's father Mathew Knowles confirmed that she had given birth to twins with Jay-Z, a daughter named Rumi and a son named Sir.


== Legal issues ==
On December 2, 1999, Jay-Z, who had come to believe that record executive Lance "Un" Rivera was behind the bootlegging of Vol. 3..., allegedly stabbed him at the Kit Kat Klub, a now-defunct night club in Times Square, New York City, during a release party for Q-Tip's album Amplified. Jay-Z's associates at the party were accused of causing a commotion within the club, which Jay-Z allegedly used as cover while he stabbed Rivera in the stomach with a five-inch (127 mm) blade. He surrendered to police the following evening and was placed under arrest, although he was soon released on $50,000 bail. When he was indicted in Manhattan Criminal Court in late January 2000, he pleaded not guilty; he and his lawyers contended that they had witnesses and videotapes proving he had been nowhere near Rivera during the incident. Nevertheless, he later pleaded guilty to third-degree assault and accepted a three-year probation sentence.Jay-Z later addressed the case in his 2010 book Decoded:

One night I went to Q-Tip's solo album release party and at some point in the night, I ran into the guy everyone's been telling me is behind the bootleg. So I approached him. When I told him what I suspected, to my surprise, he got real loud with me right there in the middle of the club. It was strange. We separated and I went over to the bar. I was sitting there like, "No the fuck this nigga did not..." I was talking to people, but I was really talking to myself out loud, just in a state of shock. Before I even realized what I was doing, I headed back over to him, but this time I was blacking out with anger. The next thing I knew, all hell had broken loose in the club. That night the guy went straight to the police and I was indicted. [...] There was no reason to put my life on the line, and the lives of everyone who depends on me, because of a momentary loss of control. [...] I vowed to never allow myself to be in a situation like that again.


== Philanthropy ==
During his first retirement from music, Jay-Z became involved in philanthropy. In 2003, along with his mother, Jay-Z founded the Shawn Carter Foundation, which assists eligible students facing socio-economic hardships attend and get through college. In August 2006, he met with Kofi Annan, then Secretary-General of the United Nations at the organization's New York City headquarters, where he pledged to use his upcoming world tour to raise awareness of the global water shortage, a challenge he learned about following a visit to Africa by Bono, the lead singer of U2. The effort took place in partnership with the UN, as well as MTV, which produced a documentary entitled Diary of Jay-Z: Water for Life, first airing in November 2006. Along with Sean "Diddy" Combs, Jay-Z pledged $1 million to the American Red Cross's relief effort after Hurricane Katrina. Jay-Z supported Kanye West after West's outburst against President George W. Bush during a live Katrina charity telethon. He also addressed the Katrina disaster and the federal government's response in his one-verse song "Minority Report".Jay-Z has said that "the greatest form of giving is anonymous to anonymous". In 2013, author dream hampton, who co-wrote Jay-Z's book Decoded, revealed that Jay-Z had established a trust fund for Sean Bell's children.Jay-Z donated to bail out protestors arrested during 2015 activism against police brutality.In March 2020, Jay-Z donated $1 million through the Shawn Carter Foundation to aid in relief during the COVID-19 pandemic in New York. In April 2020, along with Meek Mill, he donated over 100,000 face masks to U.S. prisons to assist in protecting prison inmates from COVID-19.


== Political involvement ==
In 2006, Jay-Z appeared with Russell Simmons in a public service announcement denouncing racism and anti-Semitism, sponsored by the Foundation for Ethnic Understanding. In 2008, Jay-Z was  involved in the 2008 United States presidential election, supporting enhanced voter participation. He supported the 2008 presidential candidacy of Barack Obama and performed voter-drive concerts financed by the Democrats' campaign. He also became acquainted with Obama, who in June 2008 said, "Every time I talk to Jay-Z, who is a brilliant talent and a good guy, I enjoy how he thinks. That's somebody who is going to start branching out and can help shape attitudes in a real positive way."During the 2010 mid-term elections, Jay-Z appeared with other artists in a HeadCount advertisement, urging voters, especially younger ones, to register and vote. In May 2012, Jay-Z endorsed President Obama's support of same-sex marriage and participated in his re-election campaign.Musician and civil rights activist Harry Belafonte has been critical of Jay-Z and Beyoncé in their safe political stances, saying that they "have turned their back on social responsibility" He also voiced that the hip-hop mogul likely would never have come out in support of gay marriage had President Obama not first taken the initiative.In the 2016 U.S. presidential election, Jay-Z and Beyoncé appeared at a Hillary Clinton rally in Cleveland. Clinton praised Jay-Z for addressing racism, oppression, and the criminal justice system. He described Donald Trump as a "superbug" and condemned remarks he perceived as racist, but later said that Trump's rhetoric forced people to come together and address difficult issues such as white privilege.


== Discography ==

Studio albums
Collaborative albums


== Filmography ==
Streets Is Watching (1998)
Backstage (2000)
State Property (2002)
Paper Soldiers (2002)
Paid in Full (2002, producer)
Fade to Black (2004)
The Great Gatsby (2013, executive producer)
Made in America (2013, documentary)
Annie (2014, producer)
Rest in Power: The Trayvon Martin Story (2018, executive producer)
Teddy (2023, executive producer)


== Tours ==


=== Headlining ===
Reasonable Doubt Tour (1996)
Hard Knock Life Tour (1999)
Blueprint Lounge Tour (2001)
Hangar Tour (2006)
American Gangster Live (2007)
Jay-Z Fall Tour/Blueprint 3 Tour (2009–2010)
Magna Carter World Tour (2013–14)
4:44 Tour (2017)


=== Co-headlining ===
Rock the Mic (with 50 Cent) (2003)
Best of Both Worlds Tour (with R. Kelly) (2004)
Heart of the City Tour (with Mary J. Blige) (2008)
Jay-Z & Ciara Live (with Ciara) (2009)
The Home & Home Tour (with Eminem) (2010)
Watch the Throne Tour (with Kanye West) (2011–12)
Legends of the Summer Stadium Tour (with Justin Timberlake) (2013)
On the Run Tour (with Beyoncé) (2014)
On the Run II Tour (with Beyoncé) (2018)


=== Supporting ===
No Way Out Tour (with Puff Daddy & Bad Boy Records) (1997)
Projekt Revolution 2008 Europe (with Linkin Park) (2008)
Viva la Vida Tour (with Coldplay) (2008)
U2 360° Tour (with U2) (2009–11)


== Books ==
Decoded by Jay-Z (2010: Spiegel & Grau, 336 pages), ISBN 978-1-4000-6892-0. Part memoir and part a collection of Jay-Z lyrics with the stories behind them.


== Awards and nominations ==

In 2006, he was installed as the Sarkin Waka of Kwara in Nigeria.


== See also ==
List of artists who reached number one in the United States
List of best-selling music artists
List of largest music deals
Murder Inc.
The Carters
The Throne


== Notes ==


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Greenburg, Zack O'Malley (2011). Empire State of Mind: How Jay-Z Went from Street Corner to Corner Office. New York: Portfolio/Penguin. ISBN 978-1-59184-381-8.
Edwards, Paul (2009). How to Rap: The Art and Science of the Hip-Hop MC. Chicago: Chicago Review Press. ISBN 9781556528163.


== External links ==

Official website 
Jay-Z at IMDbJonathan Allen Burks Sr. (born October 4, 1964), better known by his stage name Jaz-O (formerly The Jaz and Big Jaz), is an American rapper and record producer. Active in the late 1980s through the 1990s, he became known in retrospect for being the mentor of fellow Brooklyn rapper Jay-Z. Burks, nicknamed "the Originator", debuted the artist on his 1986 single "H. P. Gets Busy". Burks has since released three solo albums: Word to the Jaz (1989), To Your Soul (1990) and Kingz Kounty (2002), all of which were released by the record label EMI. His extended play The Warmup (2021), was the first release from the Roc Nation subsidiary Equity Distribution. He's been credited as a record producer for artists including Puff Daddy, Rakim, Usual Suspects, GZA, Kool G Rap, Queen Latifah, M.O.P., and Group Home, among others.


== Early life ==
Jonathan Burks was born in the Brooklyn borough of New York City and raised in Marcy Houses, a housing project in the Bedford-Stuyvesant neighborhood. Originally attending college to become an accountant, he decided to become a rapper after being encouraged by a friend, and being inspired after hearing Grandmaster Caz, as well as UTFO's "Roxanne, Roxanne."


== Career ==


=== Early years and signing with EMI USA ===
Being from the same projects as Jay-Z, the two would meet and become friends, with Jaz-O being a rhyme mentor to Jay-Z. Sometime during the year of 1986, the two lyricists would soon form a short-lived group by the name of High Potent. Despite the group being short-lived, the two recorded and released several songs throughout 1986, before Jaz-O would go on and get a record deal with EMI USA. In regards to the signing, he stated:

I had been rhyming since I was 14. Do the math on your own! I became a legend on the east coast - which in the 'eighties' was quite remarkable, in about six years. I was always told I was the best most had ever heard. I put out a song in 1985 called "HP Gets Busy" on our own label (my manager at the time, Jack Walker and I), featuring two of my comrades from Long Island, NY, and my young apprentice, Jay Z. We did shows regionally; NY and Pittsburgh mostly. Meanwhile, I was recording with friend and producer, Fresh Gordon. He helped me get a single deal on Tommy Boy Records after I collaborated on a song with him called "My Fila" (a response to Run DMC's, "My Adidas"). A mutual friend of Gordon and I, Marlon Prescott, introduced me to my soon-to-be manager at that time, Stan Poses. In four months Stan solidified a major artist deal for me, and I became the first rap artist ever to sign with EMI Records. I also became the recipient of the largest advance and recording budget of any rap artist at that time.


=== 1989: Word to the Jaz ===
Several months after signing with EMI USA, Jaz-O went on a trip to London, where he would record his debut album. Joining him on the trip was Jay-Z, as well as future Murder Inc Records CEO and producer Irv Gotti, who was Jaz-O's DJ at the time. After completion, Jaz-O released his debut album Word to the Jaz. The album was produced by Bryan "Chuck" New, Pete Q. Harris and Jaz-O himself. The album peaked at number 87 on the Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums chart. It featured a guest appearance from Jay-Z on the song "Hawaiian Sophie", which peaked at number 18 on the Hot Rap Songs chart. The single "Let's Play House"/"Buss the Speaker" peaked at number 26 on the Billboard Dance Club Songs chart.Jaz-O also made a guest appearance on The O'Jays's "Have You Had Your Love Today", which was a single released from their 1989 album Serious.


=== 1990: To Your Soul ===
Jaz-O released his second album To Your Soul on July 16, 1990. Despite the album not reaching the Billboard charts, its two singles, "The Originators" and "A Groove (This Is What U Rap 2)", peaked at No. 13 and No. 18, respectively, on the Hot Rap Songs chart. Similar to his debut album, Jay-Z was the only guest, being featured on two songs.


=== 1991–1996: Production work behind the scenes ===
Sometime after the album was released, Jaz-O was dropped from his record label and began to spend time working behind the scenes as a producer. At some point, Jaz-O connected with The Lox, and produced a demo tape for the group, which would become instrumental to the start of their successful career. Fellow Yonkers native Mary J. Blige, would receive the tape from a cousin who did music with the trio. Becoming a supporter of the group, Blige would pass the demo tape on to Bad Boy CEO Sean "Puffy" Combs while on a tour with Jodeci. Liking what he heard, Puff shortly signed The Lox to a deal.


=== 1996–1998: Involvement with Jay-Z's early success ===
Throughout the late 1990s, Jaz-O had quite a hand in Jay-Z's early solo success. Jaz-O produced, and was featured on "Ain't No Nigga," the second single from Jay-Z's 1996 debut album, Reasonable Doubt. The song is cited as playing a significant role in securing Jay-Z's record with Def Jam.Jaz-O then produced "Rap Game / Crack Game," a track that appeared on Jay's second album In My Lifetime, Vol. 1, released in 1997.
Jaz-O also produced two tracks for Jay-Z's Streets Is Watching. The album fared well commercially reaching #3 on the Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums chart, and was released on May 12, 1998, by Roc-A-Fella Records and Def Jam Recordings.
In 1999, Jaz-O appeared on Jay-Z's "Nigga What, Nigga Who (Originator 99)", a single that was released from Jay-Z's third album Vol. 2... Hard Knock Life. The song became a big hit in Jaz-O's career at the time. However, this would be one of the last times the two would work together on music, for their friendship soured shortly afterwards.


=== 1999–2016: Feud with Jay-Z and forming Kingz Kounty ===
The long-standing feud between him and Jay-Z started when Jay-Z started Roc-A-Fella Records and tried to convince Jaz-O and fellow rapper Sauce Money to sign with the label. They both refused. It is rumored that they did not trust Roc-A-Fella Records CEO Damon Dash and label co-founder Kareem "Biggs" Burke. In addition, they were not satisfied with what they were to receive had they signed the contract ($300,000 in Jaz-O's case). Jay-Z confirmed this event on the song "What We Talkin' About" from the Blueprint 3 album where he raps "Dame made millions, even Jaz made some scraps, he could've made more but he ain't sign his contract".Instead of signing with Roc-A-Fella Records, Jaz-O inked a deal with Rancore Records, and formed the hip-hop group Immobilarie. With the group, he released a collaboration album titled Jaz-O & The Immobilarie Family Present: Kingz Kounty.
Jay-Z went on to diss Jaz first on a track titled "Fuck Jaz-O AKA Jaz Ho", released by DJ Kayslay and featuring Freeway, Geda K, Young Chris, and Memphis Bleek. On the song, in which they rapped over Styles P's "Good Times" instrumental, and later on his album The Blueprint 2: The Gift & The Curse, Jay-Z states: "I'ma let karma catch up to Jaz-O." Jaz then responded with a record titled  "Ova"  on a DJ Kayslay mixtape, and after the response from Jay-Z and the members of Roc-A-Fella, he released the diss record response known as "Ova Part 2" in which he raps over N.O.R.E.'s "Nothin'" instrumental.
During the long-standing feud between mentor and protégé, Jay-Z would still give Jaz-O credit for his success (while dissing him at the same time) as heard in the song "I Do It For Hip Hop" on Ludacris's Theater of the Mind album, where Jay-Z says "Shout out to Grand Master Flash and to Caz and even Jaz's bum ass".
Soon after the "I Do It For Hip Hop" diss from Jay-Z, Jaz-O responded with his own diss record titled "Go Harder" which starts with Jaz-O rapping over his protege's "Brooklyn Go Hard" beat before the beat changes.
In late August 2009, Jaz-O was featured on another song dissing Jay-Z, titled "Gangstas Ride" with West Coast rapper, The Game. Jaz references "Ether" with the line, "Jaz-O, stupid motherfucker, not Shawn, never been bashed on a Tupac song". The song was fueled by beef between Game and Jay-Z at the time.


=== 2017–2020: Reunion with Jay-Z and signing with Roc Nation ===
In December 2017, Jaz-O and Jay-Z  reunited at Jay-Z's 4:44 concert, seemingly ending their feud. In 2019, it was reported that the two had worked out a music deal for Jaz-O's Kingz Kounty Media Group to be distributed through Roc Nation's Equity Distribution.On February 7, 2020, Jaz-O released an extended play (EP) titled The Warmup, on Kingz Kounty Media Group. It was distributed by Roc Nation's Equity Distribution.


=== 2021: Other ventures and releases ===
Jaz-O has since moved his 'Kingz Kounty Music Group" to Rival Distribution. He released "Lookin' Like", a collaboration single with Nipsey Hussle, on July 2, 2021. The song's music video was directed by Da Inphamus Amadeuz.


== Musical style ==


=== Influences ===
Jaz-O cites Grandmaster Caz as an early influence. Caz was the artist who made Jaz-O decide to become a rapper.


=== Rhyming style ===
Jaz-O was the rapper to pioneer the triplet flow, which allows the rapper to flow far beyond sixteen syllables within the 4/4 time signature, being able to add extra syllables to the sixteen multiplies the syllables into twenty-fourths, which makes a triplet of an eighth. Since the 1990s, the triplet rhyme technique has become a common distinction among some of the most respected hip-hop lyricists. Several rappers who are well known for the technique include his former apprentice Jay-Z, Twista, and Bone Thugs-N-Harmony, as well as Fu-Schnickens, Spice-1, and Tech N9ne.


== Personal life ==
Jaz-O was known to be a visible figure in the Nuwaubian Nation during the 1980s. Nuwaubian beliefs and symbolism were prominent in the earlier years of his music career, and Nuwaubian fashion influenced his wardrobe.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===
Word to the Jaz (1989)
To Your Soul (1990)
Kingz Kounty (2002) (with the Immobilarie)


=== Extended plays ===
Ya Don't Stop (1991)
The Warmup (2020)


=== Singles ===


== Production credits ==
Besides being an emcee, he has produced songs for several hip hop artists other than Jay-Z, including Group Home, M.O.P, Ras Kass, Rakim, Kool G Rap, and others.


=== Solo ===
1995: Group Home - "4 Give My Sins"|Livin' Proof
1996: M.O.P. - "Born 2 Kill", "World Famous", "Lifestyles of a Ghetto Child", "Born 2 Kill" (Jazz Mix)"  Firing Squad
1996: Jay-Z - "Ain't No Nigga"|Reasonable Doubt
1997: P Diddy - "I Got the Power" (Featuring The Lox)    |   No Way Out
1997: Jay-Z - "Rap Game / Crack Game""    |   In My Lifetime, Vol. 1
1998: Usual Suspects - "Crazy"  Streets Is Watching (soundtrack)
1998: Ras Kass - "H2O Proof"    |   Rasassination
1998: Jay-Z - "In My Lifetime (remix)" Streets Is Watching (soundtrack)
1998: Queen Latifah - "Court Is in Session"    |   Order in the Court
1999: Rakim - "It's A Must"    |   The Master
2002: Kool G Rap - "Black Widow"    |   The Giacana Story
2002: GZA - " Legend Of The Liquid Sword"|Legend of the Liquid Sword


== References ==Jeffrey Miree (born July 7, 1962), also known as MC Jazzy Jeff, is an American rapper and member of the Funky 4 + 1 who was active from 1979 to 2002.He is sometimes referred to as Original M.C. Jazzy Jeff, in order to indicate that he preceded DJ Jazzy Jeff from Jazzy Jeff and the Fresh Prince. Miree began his career in 1976 with hip hop group Funky 4 + 1. They were the first hip hop group to perform on national television (Saturday Night Live) performing their hit "That's the Joint" in 1981. After splitting up in 1983, MC Jazzy Jeff signed a solo deal with Jive Records and recorded the album On Fire (1985). The track "King Heroin" became a moderate success. His second album, which was completed in 1987, was never released by the label. That same year Jive Records signed Jeffrey Townes and Will Smith, better known then as DJ Jazzy Jeff & the Fresh Prince. A year later, I'm the DJ, He's the Rapper – DJ Jazzy Jeff & the Fresh Prince's debut album – was on sale.In 1994, MC Jazzy Jeff sued Jive Records and he won a lawsuit over the rights over the name Jazzy Jeff.


== Discography ==
On Fire (Jive/Arista Records) (1985)


== References ==Joyce Lynn Spencer, also known as DJ Jazzy Joyce (born June 20, 1967) is an American hip hop DJ from Bronx, New York and a producer on New York City's radio station Hot 97. She has been considered one of the most prominent rap DJs, known for her collaboration with rapper Sweet Tee on the 1986 single "It's My Beat". Joyce has performed in many areas across the United States and has also made a name for her mixtapes. She started off as a protégé of DJ Whiz Kid before deejaying for artists such as the Bad Girls and Shelly Thunder. She began deejaying for the group Digable Planets in 1994 and was featured on "9th Wonder (Blakitolism)", the first single from "Blowout Comb", the second album from Grammy winning rap group Digable Planets. Not only were her DJ cuts prominent on the hook and the outro, but Joyce also exchanged several ad libbed lines at the end of the song's third verse with group member Ladybug Mecca and she was acknowledged by her name throughout the track, even though she is referred to as Sweet Lime Pie – a name she used as an online persona. DJ Jazzy Joyce went on to tour with Digable Planets following the release of the Blowout Comb album in 1994.She was a contestant on the first season of a DJ reality show, "Master of the Mix", which aired on two cable networks: BET and Centric. Joyce also performed on Russell Simmons' Def Comedy Jam on HBO.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
DJ Jazzy Joyce on Facebook
DJ Jazzy Joyce on Twitter 
DJ Jazzy Joyce on SoundCloud 
DJ Jazzy Joyce's channel on YouTube
DJ Jazzy Joyce discography at Discogs
DJ Jazzy Joyce at IMDb
DJ Jazzy Joyce Interview at NAMM Oral History Collection (2012)Jin Au-Yeung (simplified Chinese: 欧阳靖; traditional Chinese: 歐陽靖; pinyin: Ōuyáng Jìng; born June 4, 1982), known professionally as MC Jin, is an American rapper, songwriter, actor and comedian of Chinese descent. Jin is notable for being the first Asian American solo rapper to be signed to a major record label in the United States.


== Early life ==
Jin Au-Yeung was born on June 4, 1982, in Miami, Florida, to Hong Kong immigrants of Hakka descent. He was raised in the general Miami area, where his parents owned a Chinese restaurant and Jin attended John F. Kennedy Middle School in North Miami Beach. Jin went on to attend North Miami Beach Senior High School, from which he graduated in 2000. After graduating, Jin decided to forgo college and begin his rap career. Shortly afterwards, his parents closed the restaurant and the family moved in 2001 to Queens, New York City.


== Career ==


=== 2001–2006: 106 & Park and Ruff Ryders ===
While in New York, Jin participated in many rap battles with his peers.Jin's big break came in 2002 when the BET program 106 & Park invited local rappers to compete in a segment known as Freestyle Friday. Unlike other competitors, Jin occasionally spoke Cantonese in his freestyle verses. After winning seven battles in a row, he was inducted into the Freestyle Friday Hall of Fame. The night of the ceremony, he announced that he had signed a deal with the Ruff Ryders Entertainment label.His first single under Ruff Ryders was titled "Learn Chinese" featuring Haitian rapper Wyclef Jean. It contained a sample from song "Blind Man Can See It", by James Brown (also sampled by Das EFX and Lord Finesse). The second single for the album was originally supposed to be "I Got a Love", featuring and produced by Kanye West. The album was originally scheduled to be released in the summer of 2003 but was delayed for over a year by the label. In October 2004, Jin released his debut album, The Rest Is History, which reached number 54 on the Billboard Top 200 albums chart. The two singles, "Learn Chinese" and "Senorita", were not major mainstream successes and the album only sold 19,000 units in its first week. Jin left the label in 2006.On April 23, 2005, Jin and rapper Serius Jones engaged in a rap battle. The battle was featured on Fight Klub DVD.On May 18, 2005, Jin revealed that he would be putting his rap career on hold in order to explore other options. To make this clear, he recorded a song titled "I Quit", produced by the Golden Child. The announcement was widely misunderstood to have marked the end of Jin's rap career. However, he later re-emerged under a different alias, The Emcee, and freestyled over such songs as Jay-Z's "Dear Summer." He released a single called "Top 5 (Dead or Alive)" in which he explored the history of hip-hop's greatest artists, using lyrics. The legendary DJ Kool Herc, who is credited as the founder of hip-hop, appears in Jin's music video. With independent label CraftyPlugz/Draft Records, Jin released his second album, The Emcee's Properganda, on October 25, 2005.
Jin collaborated in 2005 with Queens-born rapper Creature on his song "Never Say Die," which also featured Slug and Busdriver.Jin was also featured on Taiwanese pop artist Leehom Wang's 2005 album Heroes of Earth. Together, Jin and Leehom performed their "Heroes of the Earth" collaboration live in Shanghai on February 16, 2006, at an event arranged by China-resident American A&R exec Andrew Ballen. Ballen was also the first promoter to bring Jin to mainland China in 2003 for his "The Rest is History" tour.


=== 2006–2007: Independent label ===
Jin released two albums in 2006. The first, 100 Grand Jin, was a mixtape that was released on August 29, 2006. The single released from the album is "FYI", for which the rapper shot and released a music video. The second album is Jin's third LP, I Promise.
On his MySpace, Jin mentioned that he was working on another English album named "Birthdays, Funerals and Things in Between". Jin premiered the song, "Open Letter to Obama," on April 24, 2007, which made him become 1st on then-Presidential nominee Barack Obama's Top 8 list on MySpace.On April 16, 2007, Jin made a tribute song to the victims of the Virginia Tech massacre called "Rain, Rain Go Away". Later that year, Jin decided to make his November 2006 online album, I Promise available in retail stores; it was given an October 23, 2007, release.In 2006, the PlayStation 2/Xbox video game NBA Ballers: Phenom featured MC Jin as one of the rapper characters along with Trikz, Ludacris and Hot Sauce.
He released his first all-Cantonese language album, ABC, in 2007.


=== 2008–2011: Success in Hong Kong and newfound Christian faith ===
In 2008, Universal Music Hong Kong flew Jin out to Hong Kong to promote the re-release of his Cantonese album ABC. In an interview, Jin commented, "I think with various artists, Cantonese hip-hop was starting to become more and more widespread." ABC debuted at #1 and achieved gold status in Hong Kong. He frequently starred in commercials there and made numerous appearances on TVB like Big Boys Club. He is also seen as an important part of recent Asian hip hop trends and was once deemed "the changing face of Cantopop."Jin did a collaboration with Malaysian rapper Point Blanc in a track titled "One Day" (2008).He also put the song "Welcome to the Light Club" on his Myspace page. Jin is a Christian, stating in his song "Welcome to the Light Club" he was baptized in 2008. He has featured in Far East Movement's "Millionaire". He has done a track over a DJ Premier-produced joint titled "World Premier". He also collaborated with producer Trendsetter (aka Mark Holiday).He has recently thrown out a Hip-Hop Census in honor of the 2010 Census and Chinese New Year, 2010. As said by Jin, this mixtape is open to anybody and will be mixed from the general population along with Jin. He released a mixtape entitled "Say Something", on May 15, 2010. Jin released an album with his friend Hanjin Tan in 2010. On July 10, 2010, Jin collaborated with singer Hanjin Tan (陳奐仁) to release another Cantonese album 買一送一 (Buy one get one free). Jin also released a music video for his English single "Angels".
During his time in Hong Kong, Jin has appeared in films such as Gallants and Bruce Lee, My Brother.In December, 2010, Jin released a Christmas music video entitled "Rap Now, 2010" with Hong Kong Chief Executive, Donald Tsang. The video, with lyrics penned by Jin, featured a number of lines ending with "Act Now!" (起錨), echoing a Hong Kong government slogan. It garnered in excess of nine million views on the CE office's YouTube channel. A CNN report described the video as an "official eyesore" and "a political message thinly veiled as a Christmas card," and further criticized Jin's rapping as resembling "awkward nursery rhymes," in contrast to his earlier performances. However, local newspaper The Standard, in response to critics, stated in an editorial that "Tsang, like the millions who post videos of themselves or their loved ones, only wants to have fun."On March 7, 2011, Jin released a music video for a song from his upcoming English album entitled "Charlie Sheen," collaborating with artists Dumbfoundead and Traphik. Jin released an EP titled Sincerely Yours, a Christian-oriented and self-improvement-oriented EP featuring positive messages about life and self-reflective insights into his own life. After the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami, Jin participated in the Artistes 311 Love Beyond Borders celebrity charity concert on April 1, 2011, to help raise funds for Japan's disaster recovery effort. The 3-hour event raised over HK$26 million (USD$3.3 million).On May 16, 2011, Jin released the track "AIYA" featuring label-mate, Toestah. On August 8, 2011, Jin released his second Cantonese album, 回香靖 (Homecoming), in Hong Kong.


=== 2012–2017: Return to the United States ===
In 2012, Jin announced that he was moving back to the United States to raise his son with his wife in New York.In February 2012, Jin released a re-vamped version of his EP, Sincerely Yours 2.0, featuring some of the same lyrics, but many others changed, slightly altering the overall feel of the record. In August 2012, Jin released his English album, "Crazy Love Ridiculous Faith", for free download, an album in which he positively addresses both Christians and non-Christians. In December 2012, Jin released the Brand New Me EP.
In late 2013, Jin collaborated with independent label, The Great Company. The first track released on the label was called "Hypocrite (The Gold Chapter)." On December 21, 2013, Jin released the first EP under the label called "Hypocrite."On October 21, 2014, the label released Jin's first album under their label: XIV:LIX, which is "14:59" in Roman numerals and a reference to the concept of 15 minutes of fame. The album features Teesa, Hollis, Stacie Bollman, Tim Be Told, Bére, and Storm. The album was not a commercial success.Jin began performing stand-up comedy in New York City in 2015.


=== 2017–present: Success in mainland China ===
In 2017, he competed in the Chinese rap competition show, The Rap of China, in a masked attire, under the alias of "HipHopMan."Jin has since released several songs in Mandarin, including "Zero", a promotional song for the 2017 movie The Foreigner starring Hong Kong actor Jackie Chan, who considers Jin to be his friend.In 2021, he joined the cast of Call Me by Fire as a contestant. He was eliminated in episode 5, only to return later in episode 6, following fellow contestant Henry Huo Zun's withdrawal from the show in light of recent controversies.


== Personal life ==
Jin married his wife Carol on February 12, 2011, in Puerto Rico. The couple met at a concert at where Jin was performing. They have two sons: Chance (born 2012) and Justus (born 2019).Jin became a born again Christian in 2008. He was converted by Chinese American pastor Jaeson Ma. He has since released several gospel themed projects expressing his faith.During the 2008 United States presidential election, Jin expressed his support for Barack Obama. Proceeds from his song "Open Letter to Obama" were donated to Obama's campaign. In 2019, he announced on Twitter that he was officially endorsing presidential candidate Andrew Yang in the 2020 Democratic Party presidential primaries. He has released two songs supporting Yang: "Drew Yang Gang, That's Who I Hooked Up Wit'" and "#8MileYang". Jin also toured with Andrew Yang's campaign events. In April 2021, he released “Yang for New York,” a song and video in support of Andrew Yang’s run for mayor of New York City. The three-minute video features such lyrics as “Everyone — white, brown, yellow and black / It’s time to come together, what’s ironic is that / NY forward will bring New York Back.”


== Catchphrases and fan culture ==
Jin's catchphrase is "Aiya!" (哎吔), a Chinese interjection roughly equivalent to "Oh my gosh!". Fans pictured with the logo were able to appear in the music video for his song "Aiya!" (featuring Toestah). Jin also refers to his fans as his "AIYAfambam".After his success and popularity on the Rap of China, Jin gained widespread respect and popularity throughout China, and also with the Chinese people worldwide. A China fanbase is secure with an official account on Weibo "MCJin欧阳靖全国粉丝后援会"  on August 12, 2017. Jin then officially named his Chinese fans "不帥團隊" (Team Bu-shuai), a name which he came up with due to the focus on looks-oriented artists. Bu-Shuai means 'not handsome' in Mandarin, and Jin joked with his fans that although he is not handsome as compared to many artists, he is proud to be so as he is secure in himself as an 'un-handsome'. The official slogan for Team Bu-shuai is "生活愉快、越來不帥", which means to live joyfully and become more and more 'un-handsome'. A series of official Team Bu=shuai merchandise such as tees, hoodies, windbreakers, and caps donning the slogan and team name (designed by Jin) is also available on Taobao. Jin also released the song "不帥" with an official music video made by him and Team Bu-shuai. The song talks about the special relationship between Jin and his beloved Team Bu-Shuai, promoting the slogan "生活愉快、越來不帥". The fanbase 'Team Bu-shuai' has an official account on Weibo, with over 55,000 followers. Jin actively interacts with its members online, and is known to sometimes arrange to meet them in different cities for movies and coffees offline.Members of Jin's fan club on Twitter are known as Emojins. He referenced them in his 2018 song 'Debut': "Shout out to the emojins, and the emojins only."


== Discography ==


== Music videos ==


== Filmography ==


=== Awards ===


== Rap battles ==


== See also ==
Asian rapper
Chinese people in New York City


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Jay, Jennifer W (2008). "Rapper Jin's (歐陽靖) ABC: Acquiring spoken Cantonese and transnational identity through restaurant culture and Hong Kong TV" (PDF). Proceedings of the 20th North American Conference on Chinese Linguistics: 379–391.


== External links ==
Official Website
Old Website at the Wayback Machine (archive index)
Jin battle rap profile on Rap Grid
Jin at IMDb
Jin (English)'s channel on YouTube
Jin (Cantonese)'s channel on YouTube
Jin (English) – old)'s channel on YouTubeJohn Patrick Masterson (born October 13, 1974), known professionally as Jipsta, is an American rapper, songwriter, and music producer. Jipsta has released six studio albums: Bandoozle (2011), Turnt Up (2013), Ban2oozle (2017), "Swaggerific" (2019),"Year of the Tiger" (2021), and most recently "ORIGAMI"(2022). Jipsta's unique style of layering intricate lyrics over uptempo house music beats has resulted in seven consecutive appearances on the Billboard Dance Club Songs Chart since 2007 when his debut single "Don't Act Like You Don't Know" was released. Jipsta is also widely known for his genre-bending cover songs; the most popular of which is his cover version of "I Want Your Sex" by George Michael which reached No. 4 on the Billboard Dance Chart in 2009. Jipsta's notoriety increased significantly when he was asked to collaborate with RuPaul on the song "Sexy Drag Queen," which was heard regularly on the television program Rupaul's Drag Race. Jipsta is an openly gay man and has been in a relationship with his partner for nearly 20 years.


== Early life ==
Born in Brooklyn, New York and raised in Queens, Jipsta is of Italian, Scottish, and Irish descent. Jipsta was raised in a single parent household as his father died from pancreatic cancer. Jipsta cited his mother Patricia as the person who introduced him to and fostered his love of music. Jipsta went on to study music at Bayside High School (New York City), in Queens, where he was the Valedictorian of the 1992 graduating class. Other notable alumni of the performing arts high school include Olivia (singer), Action Bronson, and Mic Geronimo.


== Career beginnings ==
Jipsta was accepted to study at Long Island Lutheran Middle and High School, a college preparatory school in Brookville, New York. It was here that Jipsta first discovered rap music. Jipsta's first official live performance took place at a talent show sponsored by the institution in 1987 which he entered at the last minute on a dare. Jipsta, only 12 years old at the time, ultimately won the contest. In an interview, Jipsta revealed that he entered the contest using the stage name "LL Cool JP," a clever hybrid of his nickname "JP" and that of hip-hop legend LL Cool J. The story about this event is the subject of the song "7th grade," which is the first track on the Swaggerific album. Jipsta later earned a Bachelor's degree in Psychology at Queens College -City University of New York, and a Master's of Science degree at St. John's University.


== Career ==


=== Juiced Up records ===


==== 2007: "Don't Act Like You Don't Know" ====
Jipsta began releasing music on MySpace in 2007, including an early demo version of what would eventually become his debut single, "Don’t Act Like You Don’t Know." Released independently on Juiced Up records, the song quickly became a breakout and spent 4 weeks on the Billboard Dance Club Songs chart in 2008, peaking at No. 42. Its inclusion on the February 2008 issue of the Promo Only Mainstream Club disc alongside mainstream artists such as Mary J. Blige and Natasha Bedingfield was based on the positive response the track received from club play.


=== Rockberry records ===


==== 2008: "Middle of the Dancefloor" ====
The success of "Don't Act" caught the attention of Ranny, a Boston-based DJ who himself has charted on the Billboard Dance Club Songs chart, and DJ Mike Cruz who both contributed mixes for Jipsta's sophomore release,"Middle of the Dancefloor." Ranny, who had established an independent label of his own, RockBerry records, signed Jipsta to the label, and "Middle of the Dancefloor" was the first official release on the RockBerry imprint. "Middle of the Dancefloor" rapidly jumped up the Billboard chart, peaking at #6 for two weeks, making it Jipsta's first Billboard Top 10 single. The song spent a total of 14 weeks on the Billboard Dance Club Songs chart, and is also noteworthy as it is the first time an openly gay white rapper earned a Billboard Top 10 single on the Dance Club Songs chart. The success of "Middle of the Dancefloor" paved the way for Jipsta to work with more well-established and commercially successful remixers and producers for his third single.


=== Interhit Records ===


==== 2009: "I Want Your Sex" ====
Jipsta's breakthrough moment came with the release of his third single, a progressive, genre-bending cover of the George Michael classic 80's single, "I Want Your Sex." Chris Cox (DJ)(one half of the Grammy-Nominated remixing duo Thunderpuss) signed Jipsta to his Provocative Music/Interhit Records label, and "I Want Your Sex" quickly hit the Billboard Dance Club Songs Chart with a vengeance, with the song entering the chart as the Hot Shot Debut at #43, and then jumping to the #21 spot as the Power Pick in its first three weeks of release. The song climbed to the #4 position on May 2, 2009, making it Jipsta's first Top 5 Billboard single. The single also did well in the international market, making its impact on Billboard's "Global Dance Tracks" chart based on worldwide club play alone. Jipsta filmed his first official music video in support of the single, which aired in heavy rotation on Logo's Click List Top 10 countdown as well as on Logo's NewNowNext Pop Lab program.


==== 2010: "Nasty Boy" ====
Jipsta released his fourth single called "Nasty Boy" in March 2010. Serving as an homage/re-invention to the classic Vanity 6 song "Nasty Girl," the track featured house singer Inaya Day, who herself had covered the song in 2004. The song remains Jipsta's most recognizable single in terms of club play, longevity, and sales. Although the song never broke into the Top 10, peaking at #13 on the Billboard Club Play chart, it spent a total of 14 weeks on the chart. A large part of the single's widespread appeal and chart success longevity was attributed to the white label bootleg Mashup (music) by San Francisco-based Billboard reporting DJ Jamie J. Sanchez.


=== Bandoozle Beatz ===
To gain more creative control over his debut album and future releases, Jipsta founded his own independent label, Bandoozle Beatz.


==== 2011: Bandoozle ====
Jipsta released the highly anticipated debut album, entitled "Bandoozle" in May 2011 to positive reviews. It entered the iTunes Charts Top 200 dance albums in the Top 50 and remained on that chart for over five months. Bandoozle contains the album versions of the previous released stand-alone singles "Don't Act Like You Don't Know," "Middle of the Dancefloor," and "I Want Your Sex" plus 11 new songs recorded for the album.
Jipsta sought new musical collaborators to help extend the reach of his music to a wider audience. The first official single release from "Bandoozle" was "U Got (What I Need)," which featured production from DJ John Rizzo. This was the first of Jipsta's singles that was not promoted to the Billboard panel as a shift had occurred in the market favoring EDM style dance music, a style that was not represented on this release. The single received significant support, however, based on the strength and crossover appeal of the music video, which featured cameo appearances by Pandora Boxx, Sahara Davenport, Jessica Wild, and Milan, all of whom appeared as cast members of the television program RuPaul's Drag Race. The video was serviced to video bars and clubs throughout the United States by its placement on the Promo Only video compilation entitled "Dance Mix Video: November 2011" alongside mainstream artists including Katy Perry, LMFAO, and Katy B.
To further support the Bandoozle album, Jipsta released an original song featuring legendary dance diva Sandy B called "Party of the Year," which marked the first musical collaboration between Jipsta and Grammy nominated producer/remixer Chris Cox. In an interview Jipsta explained that the song was written with the intention of becoming a song that would be played annually on New Year's Eve and at all LGBT Gay Pride events. The song peaked on the Billboard Dance Club Play chart at Number 10, earning Jipsta his third Billboard Top 10 record. A video concept was discussed but never came to fruition due to scheduling conflicts at the time.
The third and final single to be released from the Bandoozle album was "Too New York." In a similar vein to the Jay-Z and Alicia Keys collaboration "Empire State of Mind," the song is an homage to New York City and takes the listener on a journey through the city as seen through Jipsta's eyes. The video directed by Greg Scarnici and Ian Sklarsky is a fast-paced, colorful, and fun tour-de-force through Brooklyn and Manhattan, and helped to boost sales of "Bandoozle" as the video increased in popularity.


==== 2012–2013: Collaborations with Ranny: "Moombah Zoombah" and "Body Pop" ====
Capitalizing on the success of the "Bandoozle" album, Jipsta's long-time friend and musical collaborator, Ranny, suggested that the two pair up to record songs for Ranny's debut EP entitled "Party Crasher," which was released in December 2012 on Ranny's Rockberry imprint. Ranny wanted to push Jipsta into new musical directions to gain a wider group of listeners. The first collaboration, "Moombah Zoombah," saw Jipsta switching up his style from fast-paced, intricate lyrical verses to a greater focus on stronger, more memorable hooks over a slower BPM moombahton track, a very popular musical style of the time. At the same time, Jipsta was recording another song with Ranny called "Body Pop." Due to the longevity of the run that "Moombah Zoombah" had in the clubs, a decision was made to push back the release of "Body Pop." "Body Pop" appears on Jipsta's second album, "Turnt Up," and reached No. 11 on the Billboard Dance chart in December 2014.


==== 2013: Turnt Up ====
Wasting no time, Jipsta returned to the studio to begin work on his next album. Jipsta's sophomore album, entitled "Turnt Up" was released in August 2013. The album's songs reflected a progression and maturation in Jipsta's song lyrics and overall sound, with a greater focus on hip-hop tracks. The album included the two collaborations with Ranny, "Moombah Zoomah" and "Body Pop," as well as the lead single from the album "Lover Who Rocks You," a collaboration with Reina (musician). The song is a cover version of the version originally recorded by salsa singer La India in 1990. "Lover Who Rocks You" peaked at No. 20 on the Billboard Dance Club Play chart. It also did well in terms of sales, debuting on the iTunes Top 200 dance singles chart at No. 112. The second single from the album, "Abracadabra" features vocals by singer Joe Thompson from the NYC-based group Undercover.


==== 2017: Ban2oozle ====
After taking a self-imposed hiatus in the wake of the subway attack in 2014, Jipsta hinted to fans on Twitter that he was at work in the studio on his third studio album, which would be entitled "Ban2oozle." "Ban2oozle" is Jipsta's most successful album to date, debuting at No. 45 on the iTunes Top 200 albums chart in January 2017. This is the first album where Jipsta was involved heavily with production of the tracks. Longtime friend and collaborator Chris Cox is credited as co-producer on 7 of the album's 12 tracks. The lead single from the album was the eponymous song "Ban2oozle." The song became a smash hit overseas in particular, eventually climbing to #80 on the iTunes Electronic songs chart in Poland "All Systems Go" was selected as the second official single from the "Ban2oozle" album. The video for the song reflected a maturation in Jipsta's personal appearance and artistic vision. Following its release in June 2018, the video had become Jipsta's most successful to date, garnering widespread critical praise for its creativity, vision, and production value. The final song to be released from the album was "Hotel Motel," whose Halloween-themed video saw Jipsta taking on a more serious acting role.


==== 2018–2019:"Block Party (EP)" ====
Ranny asked Jipsta to record a song called "Free." Released in June 2018, the song stands as an inspirational song celebrating diversity and personal freedoms. The song features Joey T (formerly Joe Thompson) who was previously featured on Jipsta's single "Abracadabra." "Free" was the lead single from an EP the duo released on Rockberry Records entitled "Block Party." "Block Party also contains updated remixes of "Middle of the Dancefloor," "Party of the Year," and "Perfect Match," as well as a new song "(Hit It) From the Back." In order to build anticipation for Jipsta's upcoming album "Swaggerific," Ranny produced a funk carioca remix for (Hit It) From the Back," which was released in May 2019. Popularity for this mix continues to grow, with over 30K streams reported on Spotify in only two months time


==== 2019: Swaggerific ====
"Swaggerific," (A combination of the words "swagger" and "terrific) is Jipsta's fourth full-length studio album, released on Bandoozle Beatz on July 5, 2019. Seven of the album's ten tracks were produced by Jipsta. Overall, the energy of the album can be described as fun, upbeat, and nostalgic, with track production embracing sounds from 1990's "Hip-House" and "Party Rap" but also integrating more current trap drums and sub-bass sounds to keep the listener engaged throughout. The album begins with a biographical song called "7th Grade," where Jipsta talks about first discovering hip-hop music, using his emerging rap skills as a means to avoid being teased at school, and describing the rush of his first performance at a talent show. The final song on the album, entitled "Industry," is a deeply introspective and lyrically complex look at the state of the music industry and the challenges that independent artists face in the current "like/follow" marketplace. Jipsta also returns to his roots on "Swaggerific" in order to showcase his skills in creating genre-bending cover songs. "New Man (featuring Sharon T)", originally written and performed by Ed Sheeran, and "Touch My Body," by Mariah Carey, are completely re-worked in the style Jipsta has become well known for. Both songs feature production by Grammy-nominated producer/remixer Chris Cox. The lead single from the album, is entitled "Berenjena" (the Spanish word for 'eggplant.') The "Berenjena" Remix EP, which was released on June 28, 2019 features remixes by Ranny, Mark VDH, and Billboard reporter Twisted Dee.


==== 2019: "Ay Ay Ay (It's Christmas)" ====
Jipsta released his first Christmas song on December 22, 2019. The song is a cover version of "Ay Ay Ay (It's Christmas)" originally recorded by Ricky Martin in 2000. The original version of the song appears on the Rosie O'Donnell Christmas album "A Rosie Christmas."


==== 2021: "Year of the Tiger"(EP) ====
While his last two albums were more influenced by Golden Age Hip-Hop sounds and musical style, Jipsta announced that his new album "Year of the Tiger" would be a return to his dance music roots and features production by both Jipsta and Ranny. The lead single, D.A.N.C.E. was released on October 9, 2020. In an interview with Instinct Magazine, Jipsta explained that the title is an acronym for the phrase "Dance All Night, Come On Everybody," the idea for which came to him while on vacation in Provincetown, Ma. The song has garnered high praise and has been streamed over 60K times since its release.


=== Outside Collaborations ===
2009: NYC club life celebrity Jonny McGovern took notice of the buzz Jipsta had generated in the NYC area, and asked Jipsta to be a featured guest artist on a remix to the Britney Houston track "And the Crowd Goes," which was included in the re-release of his album "The East Village Mixtape Volume 2: The Legends Ball."
2011: Jipsta was asked by music producer and remixer Jared Jones to provide a guest rap verse on the remix being worked on for RuPaul's single "Sexy Drag Queen." The song appears at the first track on RuPaul's album "SuperGlam DQ."
2011: Jipsta is also a contributing writer for other artists as well, the most noteworthy of which being Pandora Boxx, who appeared as a contestant on RuPaul's Drag Race (season 2) Jipsta was the primary writer for the single "Cooter" for Pandora Boxx.
2014: Jipsta is featured on the album RuPaul Presents: The CoverGurlz alongside RuPaul's Drag Race Season 6 contestant April Carrion. The album was released on January 28, 2014. and debuted at No. 6 on the iTunes Dance Albums Chart
2014: Teaming up again with producer Jared Jones, Jipsta was a featured artist on the remix for the Latrice Royale song "Weight (song)." Latrice Royale was a contestant on Season 4 of RuPaul's Drag Race.
2016: Jipsta collaborated with the UK-based group Shelter, providing a guest verse on the song "Wot U Said," which appears on the group's album "Ascend." Shelter have been the supporting act on Erasure's "Violet Flame" tour.


== Hate crime ==
In March 2014, Jipsta was attacked in a New York City subway station as he and his partner were celebrating their 10-year anniversary. The assailant began calling the couple homophobic slurs, and following a verbal disagreement, Jipsta was beaten by the unidentified subject, resulting in multiple fractures to his face. As a result of the incident, Jipsta required surgery due to seven broken bones sustained to his nose and eye socket, which forced him to cease promotion of his second album Turnt Up. Jipsta teamed with the film company WOW Films, founded by Carina Rush and Broadway actress Cheryl Allison, to tell the story in an upcoming documentary titled Pieces of Us. The documentary is set to be released on March 7, 2023


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===
Bandoozle (2011)
Turnt Up (2013)
Ban2oozle (2017)
Swaggerific (2019)
Year of the Tiger (2021)
ORIGAMI (2022)


=== Singles ===


=== Music videos ===
Jipsta has filmed several music videos in support of the release of his singles which have aired on the MTV network and Logo, a US cable channel geared towards the gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) community. 

2009: The video for "I Want Your Sex" was filmed at The Empress Hotel in Asbury Park, which is owned by music producer Shep Pettibone.
2011: The video for "U Got (What I Need)" features cameo appearances by four cast members (Pandora Boxx, Jessica Wild, Milan, and Sahara Davenport) from the Emmy-Award-winning Logo television show RuPaul's Drag Race.
2012: The video for "Too New York" was directed by Greg Scarnici who is a writer for Saturday Night Live.
2014: The video for "Body Pop" contains previously recorded live performance footage of Jipsta, as he was recovering from the injuries sustained in the subway attack and unable to travel when the single was released.
2017: The video for "Ban2oozle" was filmed in Las Vegas. The visual effects used in the video is done with rotoscoping, a technique popularized in the video "Take on Me" by the band A-Ha.
2018: "All Systems Go" was chosen as the second official single from the "Ban2oozle" album. A video for the song was released in June 2018 and currently has over 160K views on YouTube.
2018: The final video from the "Ban2oozle" album was for the song "Hotel Motel." The video, which was released in late October in time for Halloween, highlights Jipsta's acting ability, as he plays a cannibal who lures unsuspecting men to his apartment under the pretense of a romantic encounter, only to end up dismembering them. "Hotel Motel" is Jipsta's most successful video to date, garnering nearly 170K views on YouTube.
2021: "Wordsmith" was the first music video released to support the "Year of the Tiger" EP. Unlike his previous live action videos, Jipsta elected to create his first Lyric Video to promote the single. Jipsta has often described himself as a "grammar geek" and this song was written as an homage to the educational television program "School House Rock" as a vehicle to teach children grammar.
2021: "D.A.N.C.E." was the second lyric video created to support the "Year of the Tiger" EP.


== See also ==
LGBT hip hop
List of hip-hop musicians
I Want Your Sex


== References ==


== External links ==
Official siteJo-Vaughn Virginie Scott (born January 20, 1995), known by his stage name as Joey Badass (stylized as Joey Bada$$), is an American rapper. A native of Brooklyn, New York City, he is a founding member of the hip-hop collective Pro Era, with whom he has released three mixtapes as well as his numerous solo projects.
Joey Badass released his debut mixtape, 1999, in June 2012 to critical acclaim and recognition, followed by Rejex in September, and Summer Knights in July 2013. His debut studio album, B4.Da.$$, was released in January 2015. In 2016, he made his television debut on the USA Network series Mr. Robot. His second and third studio album, All-Amerikkkan Badass and 2000, were released in April 2017 and July 2022, respectively.


== Early life ==
Jo-Vaughn Virginie Scott was born on January 20, 1995, and was the first of his immediate Caribbean family to be born in the United States. His 
maternal family originated from the Caribbean island of St. Lucia, while his paternal family originates from the island of Jamaica. He was born in the East Flatbush section of Brooklyn, New York City. He was raised in Bed-Stuy and attended the Edward R. Murrow High School. He originally enrolled at Edward R. Murrow to study acting, but transitioned towards music around the time of 9th grade, with a focus on rapping.He started rapping under the name "JayOhVee", but eventually changed it to Joey Badass. He says that the name change is due to the media's focus on rappers with more cynical names, saying it was "what sounded cool at the time, what fit [his] mood". He began writing poetry and songs at the age of 11. Along with CJ Fly, he is a founding member of the collective known as Progressive Era, or Pro Era for short, which was formed by his high school friends Capital Steez and Powers Pleasant.


== Career ==


=== 2010–2014: Beginnings and breakthrough ===
In October 2010, Joey Badass uploaded a video of himself freestyling to YouTube. The video was re-posted on to American hip hop site World Star Hip Hop and caught the attention of Jonny Shipes, the president of Cinematic Music Group, who soon after became his manager.In early 2012, Joey Badass and Capital Steez released a video for "Survival Tactics" via their YouTube channel "PROfckingERA", which samples the 2000 Fold song of the same name by Styles of Beyond. In February 2012, Pro Era released their debut mixtape entitled The Secc$ Tap.e. On March 21, 2012, MTV News featured Joey Badass' verse from the video during a RapFix Live segment and subsequently appeared as a featured guest on Sucker Free the following month. The song was succeeded with the video premiere of "Hardknock" featuring CJ Fly on MTV2.On June 12, 2012, Joey Badass released his debut solo mixtape 1999. This album was only released to music streaming platforms such as Spotify and Apple Music in 2018. A video for the song "Waves" was released in June 2012. The mixtape immediately increased his popularity in the underground scene. The mixtape was named the 38th best album of 2012 by Complex magazine and the best mixtape of 2012 by HipHopDX. On September 6 of the same year, he released another mixtape titled Rejex, which featured all the tracks that did not make it on the 1999 mixtape.
Subsequently, American rapper Mac Miller reached out to Joey Badass through Twitter to collaborate. He appeared on the song "America" from the mixtape Macadelic and opened for Miller at the Roseland Ballroom in April 2012. Along with headliner Juicy J, Joey Badass and Pro Era performed on The Smoker's Club's One Hazy Summer Tour, presented by Eckō Unltd. and livemixtapes.com.  The 30-date tour began in July 2012. He was featured on the posse cut track "1 Train" off ASAP Rocky's album Long.Live.ASAP (2013) which also features Action Bronson, Kendrick Lamar, Yelawolf, Big K.R.I.T., and Danny Brown.
In December 2012 it was rumored that Joey Badass would be signing to Jay Z's Roc Nation record label, but in January 2013, he dispelled the rumors saying he would rather stay independent than sign to a major label for the time being. On December 21, 2012, Pro Era released the P.E.E.P: The aPROcalypse mixtape.On November 9, 2012, Joey Badass released a track with Ab-Soul produced by Lee Bannon called "Enter the Void" along with "Waves". These songs were his first official releases to retail. On January 14, 2013, he released the first single off his second mixtape Summer Knights, "Unorthodox", which was produced by DJ Premier. On February 8, he released a music video featuring Big K.R.I.T. and Smoke DZA titled "Underground Airplay". The song was featured on the Eckō Unltd. mixtape. On March 5, 2013, he released the music video for "Unorthodox". On March 21, 2013, he began the Beast Coast concert tour with Pro Era, The Underachievers and Flatbush Zombies. On March 26, 2013, it was announced that Joey Badass would be a part of XXL Magazine's 2013 Freshman Class.On October 29, 2013, Summer Knights EP was released. It featured four songs from the mixtape of the same name, and three new songs including a remix. Upon release, the EP debuted at number 48 on the US Billboard Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums chart.


=== 2014–2015: B4.DA.$$ ===

In August 2014, Joey Badass appeared in a quasi-autobiographical short film entitled No Regrets, directed by Rik Cordero, in which he portrays himself. In an interview on Shade 45 Radio in March 2016, he explained that "it's been my dream to act since I was in like eighth grade. I always wanted to be an actor. And I feel like the music just made it a little bit easier for me to chase that dream."On August 4, 2014, he released the first single from his upcoming debut studio album titled "Big Dusty" with the music video coming out 8 days later. On September 30, he premiered the second single from the album titled "Christ Conscious" on MTV Jams. The third single from the album entitled "No. 99" was released on December 9. On December 23, the fourth single, "Curry Chicken" was released. On January 13 appearing on The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon, he performed the song "Like Me" live with BJ the Chicago Kid, The Roots and Statik Selektah. On January 20, 2015, his 20th birthday, the album entitled B4.DA.$$ was released to critical acclaim.On September 3, 2015, Joey Badass released a collaborative single with Korean hip-hop group Epik High's Tablo and producer Code Kunst called "Hood". On October 6, 2015, he collaborated with British indie rock band Glass Animals, releasing a single titled "Lose Control".


=== 2016–2019: All-Amerikkkan Bada$$ ===

On March 4, 2016, Joey Badass made his television debut in the second season of the hit TV series Mr. Robot, where he was cast in the recurring role of Leon, who is an associate of Elliot (played by Rami Malek). On May 26, 2016, he released another single called "Devastated". The song peaked at number 25 on the Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart, which became Joey's highest charting single to date (as a solo artist). The single was certified gold by the RIAA on January 6, 2017. On January 20, 2017, Joey Badass released "Land of the Free". On March 2, 2017, Joey Bada$$ revealed the title of his second studio album titled "All-Amerikkkan Bada$$". On April 7, 2017, Joey Badass released the album. On May 12, 2017, it was announced that Joey Badass will go on Logic's Everybody's Tour with Big Lenbo, in support of Logic's third studio album Everybody.On December 28, 2017, Joey Badass announced via Twitter that he was originally featured on Post Malone's track "Rockstar" along with T-Pain. Badass also admitted to ghostwriting the track. Florida rapper XXXTentacion announced on Instagram that he had a collaboration project with Joey Badass, Badass later confirmed this on January 20, 2018. The two dropped a remix of the song "King's Dead" on SoundCloud on March 9, 2018. The two later on dropped a song titled "Infinity (888)" on XXXTentacion's second studio album ? one week later on March 16. With the killing of XXXTentacion, though, their collaborative project is all but confirmed to be not happening. On June 12, 2018, Joey re-issued 1999 on all streaming services and vinyl for its 6th anniversary, and in a following interview with Peter Rosenberg, revealed his fatherhood, making public his first child, then 2-month-old Indigo Rain. In December 2019, he was also featured in XXXTentacion's second posthumous and last album, Bad Vibes Forever.


=== 2020–present: 2000 ===
In July 2020, Joey Badass released a 3-track EP entitled The Light Pack. In November, he featured on Phony Ppl's "On My Shit".On May 11, 2022, he announced his upcoming third studio album, titled 2000 The album was to be released on June 17, 2022, however due to sample clearance issues, he announced on Twitter that he would have to delay the project. The album was released on July 22, 2022, with guest appearances from Diddy, Westside Gunn, Larry June, Chris Brown, Capella Grey, and JID. He also went on a 20-date summer concert tour called the 1999-2000 Tour in support, which began July 1, 2022 in Boston and concluded July 28, 2022 in Los Angeles.


== Influences ==
In an interview with XXL, Joey Badass stated that he was influenced by Nas, 2Pac, Black Thought, MF DOOM, J Dilla, Andre 3000, Jay-Z, and The Notorious B.I.G. He has been compared to rapper Big L and Nas during his Illmatic era.


== Controversy ==


=== Legal issue ===
In January 2015, Joey Badass was arrested and charged with assault for allegedly breaking a security guard's nose before performing at the Falls Festival in Byron Bay, New South Wales, Australia.


=== Feud with Troy Ave ===
In June 2015, tensions between Joey Badass and fellow Brooklyn native Troy Ave began brewing after the former declared himself the "#1 independent hip hop artist/brand in the world" in a series of tweets. Troy Ave responded in another tweet by pointing out that Joey Badass is signed to Cinematic Music Group, whose music is distributed by RED Distribution, a subsidiary of Sony Music Entertainment, but Joey Badass later denied reports of a feud between the two of them.On July 7, 2015, in an interview with Ebro Darden on Hot 97, Joey Badass had words of praise for Troy Ave, stating: "At some point you gotta have some level of respect for Troy because, at the end of the day, we're both independent artists who are standing on major platforms next to a whole bunch of major artists and they know who we are." However, in February 2016, he reignited the feud in a single entitled "Ready", where he rapped: "60k, first week for the badass / 200k to this day, I know you niggas mad / With that 80-20 split, my nigga do the math / my nigga Kirk just outsold Troy Ave" (in reference to Kirk Knight's debut studio album Late Knight Special and Troy Ave's second studio album Major Without a Deal).In response to "Ready", Troy Ave released a diss track entitled "Badass" the following week, in which he not only insulted Joey Badass, but also targeted Capital Steez and his suicide. Following the song's release, Troy Ave defended his actions on Shade 45's Sway in the Morning, stating: "He didn't pass away; he killed himself. There's a difference. He took his own life. God gave you life, it ain't your right to take that. That's a fact. I got niggas in jail who got life sentences, they might as well be dead. They could've traded their life for his." He then received heavy criticism from both fans and fellow artists, including A$AP Ant, A$AP Twelvyy and Styles P who wrote, amongst a series of other tweets: "If you never experienced a family [member] committing suicide you have no fukn [sic] idea about that pain. NONE." Troy Ave then replied to Styles P's comments and apologized to his fans on Twitter. In an interview on VladTV, another Brooklyn rapper, Maino, stated that mentioning Capital Steez's suicide in the song was "a bit much".
...He took a leap of faith and only brightened his light / You took a cheap shot at hate and only shortened your life / Difference between you and him is that he lives forever / You'll be the first to die that nobody ever remembers / 'cause the city never needed you ever / You committed career suicide and made New York better...
In a freestyle on Sway in the Morning on March 29, 2016, Joey Badass responded to "Badass" in a series of lines aimed at Troy Ave, though never referring to him directly. Among other lines, he rapped: "I destroy average rappers, it's just practice […] Men lie, women lie, numbers sure don't / Got the whole Beast Coast coming for your skull / The karma gon' catch up, your album sales won't". In an interview with HipHopDX the following day, Fat Joe stated that he personally reached out to both Joey Badass and Troy Ave to try and squash the feud, but failed.


== Philanthropy ==
In May 2020, Joey Badass donated $25,000 to support homeless students in New York City during the COVID-19 crisis.


== Discography ==

Studio albumsB4.Da.$$ (2015)
All-Amerikkkan Badass (2017)
2000 (2022)Mixtapes1999 (2012)
Summer Knights (2013)EPsThe Light Pack (2020)


== Filmography ==


== Awards and nominations ==


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website 
Pro Era official website
Joey Badass at IMDbJerome "Chilla" Jones is a musician and battle rapper, representing the city of Boston, Massachusetts, as well as New England, every place he steps. At 16, he terrorized the battle circuits across Boston, MA throughout his high school career. Eventually, he would shift focus 100% from battling into the craft of songwriting and music making. From there, he began to build a name for himself locally for his punchline ability and for having genuine and creative song concepts that most of us can relate to. Chilla released 6 solo mixtapes over the course of 3 years. 
One night in February 2011, Chilla received a phone call from a local emcee, Gatman Jones (Currently known as Sunny Carson) calling him out on the radio to a rap battle. After declining multiple times, Chilla decided to accept the challenge, and won the battle in very impressive fashion. The very next month, Boston battle rapper Interstate Flamez would also publicly challenged Chilla Jones to a battle in his own Shark Tank Battle League (Now known as 'The Tank') and in June 2011, they would go on to have one of the greatest rap battles to be captured on camera in Boston history.  Shortly after this battle, many major battle leagues in the U.S. reached out to Chilla Jones in hopes he would tryout or join their ranks, all of which Chilla declined many times in order to continue focusing on his music and running his battle league. However Chilla never declined any offers from Canada and was booked for his first "big league" battle in August on 2011 with King of the Dot, on their World Domination 2 event vs Ketch-P, but unfortunately his opponent cancelled on him. Then the Ultimate Rap League, better known as the URL reached out to him and Chilla decided to battle in their new league known as "The Proving Grounds" to help expand the platform of his own league, and in hopes of paving a path to the league for other aspiring battlers from Boston.
Since March 2012, Chilla Jones entered the Ultimate Rap League and took the battle world by storm. His debut battle was against Cash Eatin out of Detroit, Michigan, and from that battle he sent shock waves through the hip-hop culture with his unique style now branded as "Schemin' " or 'Associated Wordplay' . On the eve of one of the biggest battle rap events in Hip-Hop history (URL's Summer Madness 2), Chilla Jones took on Pontiac's JC in what would become one of the greatest rap battles ever. This battle catapulted Chilla to new heights and he gained tons of notoriety off of his performance. The self-proclaimed "Mr. Jump to Top Tier from the Proving Grounds", after his battles with JC and B.Magic, was now a name targeted by up and comers and veterans alike.
After spending much of the last 3 years focused on building his brand through battle rap, Chilla is now working to balance both the music and the battling to prove he is a double threat and can be successful in either field. He released the "Welcome to Bosstown" mixtape in September 2014, which shows his versatility musically and features songs of all different concepts and styles. On the battling side, he has remained consistently great, having main event battles in Holyoke Ma, New York City, London, Atlanta, and LA all since April 2015.


== Discography ==


=== Mixtapes ===
2007 - Jones: The Mixtape (Hosted by DJ Vlad)
2008 - The Freestyle Champ (Hosted by DJ 2Thirteen)
2009 - The Countdown (Mixed by DJ 2Thirteen)
2009 - Time Bomb (Hosted by DJ On & On)
2010 - 23: The Mixtape (Mixed by DJ 2Thirteen)
2010 - The Juggernaut (Mixed by DJ 2Thirteen)
2012 - Certifried Vol.1: High Def (w/ Riznut)
2012 - Certifried Vol.2: The Passion (w/ Riznut)
2014 - Welcome to Bosstown (Mixed by DJ 2Thirteen)


== Battle Rap History ==
Vs. Gatman Jones, Funky Fresh Radio - March 21, 2011
Vs. Interstate Flamez, Shark Tank Battlegrounds -  June 11, 2011
Vs. Strange Da Wordplay King, Ultimate Rap League Proving Grounds - February 11, 2012 (Unreleased)
Vs. Cash Eatin', Ultimate Rap League Proving Grounds - March 24, 2012
Vs. M. Ciddy, Poison Pen/Ultimate Rap League - July 15, 2012
Vs. JC, Ultimate Rap League - August 18, 2012
Vs. B-Magic, Ultimate Rap League - November 17, 2012
Vs. DNA, Ultimate Rap League - June 23, 2013
Vs. The Deadman, King of the Dot - October 11,2013
Vs. Young Kannon, Go-Rilla Warfare/Black Ice Cartel - October 19, 2013
Vs. Charlie Clips, Empire Battle League - January 5, 2014 (Unreleased)
Vs. Blackheart Adonis, iBattle Worldwide - March 29,2014
Vs. Daylyt, King of the Dot Entertainment - April 19, 2014
Vs. Real Deal, King of the Dot Entertainment - June 28, 2014
Vs. Young Ill, Dallas/Fort Worth Battle League - October 18, 2014
Vs. Cee Major, Don't Flop - November 16, 2014
Vs. Dialect, King of the Dot Entertainment - November 22, 2014
Vs. 100 Bulletz, King of the Dot Entertainment - February 7, 2015
Vs. Math Hoffa, Don't Flop - April 4, 2015
Vs. Conceited, King of the Dot Entertainment - May 16,2015
Vs. Dizaster, King of the Dot Entertainment - June 27, 2015
Vs. Prep, Ultimate Rap League - July 25, 2015
Vs. Pass, King of the Dot Entertainment - August 22, 2015
Vs. Tony D, Don't Flop - November 15, 2015
Vs. Th3 Saga, Ultimate Rap League - December 12, 2015
Vs. QP, Black Ice Cartel - January 10, 2016
Vs. Cortez, Ultimate Rap League - March 6, 2016
w/ B-Magic Vs. T-Top & Brizz Rawsteen, Ultimate Rap League - March 26, 2016
Vs. The Saurus, 413 Battle League- November 14, 2016
Vs. Arsonal, UDubb Network Battle League - January 22, 2017
Vs. Gjonaj, King of the Dot Entertainment - April 15, 2017
Vs. Illmaculate, King of the Dot Entertainment - July 22, 2017
Vs. Madflex, Counter Productive - July 29, 2017
Vs. QPacalypse, No Coast - September 23, 2017
Vs. Charlie Clips (Rematch), Black Ice Cartel - September 27, 2017
Vs. Jey The Nitewing, Skytier Premier - November 11, 2017
Vs. Vega, Real Talk - November 25, 2017
Vs. Cephdeezy The Sandman, Ball Hogg Ent. - December 23, 2017
Vs. Krome, King of the Dot Entertainment - February 3, 2018
Vs. Mr. RE, Chalked Out - February 10, 2018
Vs. Ness Lee, No Coast - February 23, 2018
Vs. See Jee, Premier Rap Battle League - March 3, 2018
Vs. Stuey Newton, Evrylane Ent. - March 10, 2018


== References ==Saleem Bligen, known professionally as Serius Jones (born December 25, 1982), is an American rapper from New Jersey who is widely known for his freestyle battles. Jones won 12 consecutive battles at New York's Monday Night Fight Klub before facing and beating former Fight Klub King Jin The MC to become MTV's all-time Fight Klub Champion. Jones independently released King Me in 2006, followed by Serius Bizness in 2008 and Why So Serius? in 2009.


== Name ==
Jones chose the name "Serius" from a book on Egyptian phenomena, the star Sirius was extremely important to the Egyptians, lining up with the Pyramid of Giza.


== Career ==


=== Battle rap career ===
His most known battles are Jones vs. Jin, Jones vs. Big Ace, which both appeared on MTV 2's Fight Klub, and also Jones vs. Murda Mook which appeared on a SMACK DVD, and also received over one million views youtube.com, Vlad TV, World Star Hip Hop.com and more.


=== Deal with Disturbing Tha Peace Records ===
Serius Jones signed a record deal with rapper Ludacris's Disturbing tha Peace record label in 2006 but 18 months later Serius and DTP parted ways. In an interview with HipHopDX.com, Serius stated,

The hospitality in the beginning was really there. But I think after a while people just got annoyed of me, and sick of me. It's like, this gotdamn Serius Jones guy. He keeps going. He's not stopping and just settling in like everybody else. And it's like, no muthafucka I'm not stopping and allowing myself to be [content] with riding in the fuckin promo van. Like, nah B, this is rap star shit. Cause if it ain't, and if you ain't no fuckin rap star, you just some other little dusty rap nigga with a chain trying to be noticed. And that ain't never been my style. It's all love though, on my end, he said. I don't have nothing but good wishes for them. I wish them all the best. In terms of being people, in terms of character, I don't think they had any malice towards me. But it's a business.
Jones has also stated that:

I heard stuff that supposedly I'm a head case, he said. I'm supposedly a diva. Like, I think my shit don't stink and all this. Look man, if anybody know me, and if anybody has followed anything about me, they know that I'm a humble dude with it when it comes to me not being on stage, when it comes to me not being a rapper. A star is supposed to shine [though]. [And] I'm not turning my shine off because people are uncomfortable about it. I can't do that. I can't afford to do that. I gotta feed people. I gotta eat and at the end of the day, I'm on a mission.


=== Life is Serius ===
Between 2006 and 2010, Jones produced and starred in a short autobiography film entitled Life is Serius, directed by acclaimed Independent Filmmaker/Producer Winfield Ezell, Jr.  Jones also put out nearly 50 records, 100 music videos, short films, comedy sketches and an animated series "Day In The life" staying relevant online and in the blogs. Jones headlined a tour through Europe while filming a documentary of the experience entitled "The Euro Tour" and recording an album of the same name, including 2 music videos filmed in Rome.


=== 2011-present: Offer From Luxe Society Records, Living Legend and Legendary ===
Jones is released Serius Business 2 on Thanksgiving in 2011. The EP features appearances by 2 Chainz, Gucci Mane, T-Pain, Bobby V, Sam Scarfo, and Jay Rock.  In May 2012 Serius Jones was offered a deal with recently funded indie label Luxe Society Records. Nothing materialized from the offer and no music was ever released.
After a return to battle rap, Serius Jones will release his mixtape Living Legend on February 18, 2014, and follow up with his Legendary album in April of the same year. In conjunction with Serius Jones, the Jersey Mint Records, a New Jersey-based indie record label, was scheduled to release the album but the project was never released.
Since his battle rap return in 2012 to date (April 2017) Serius Jones is "arguably" undefeated, most recently battling Battle Rap star Dizaster on KOTD.


== Arrest ==
Jones was convicted and sentenced to three years for pimping, dissuading a witness, and other charges in October 2020.


== Discography ==


== Videography ==
Serius Jones Presents Life is Serius (2012)


== References ==


== Further reading ==
"Serius Jones vs. Jin Tha Emcee". MTV. Archived from the original on 2 February 2016. Retrieved 23 August 2015.
"Fight Klub Season 2 Taping June 4th". RealTalk NY. Archived from the original on 2 April 2012. Retrieved 23 August 2015.
"Mixtape Monday: Snoop Fought To Work With Dre; Bleek Hates On The Haters - MTV NEWS". MTV. Archived from the original on 14 March 2014. Retrieved 23 August 2015.


== External links ==
Official Website
Serius Jones at the Luxe Society Records Website
Serius Jones battle rap profile on Rap Grid
Serius Jones channel at YouTubeBarrington DeVaughn Hendricks (born October 22, 1989), known professionally as JPEGMafia (stylized in all caps), is an American rapper, singer, and record producer born in New York City and based in Baltimore, Maryland. His 2018 album Veteran, released through Deathbomb Arc, received widespread critical acclaim and was featured on many year-end lists. It was followed by 2019's All My Heroes Are Cornballs and 2021's LP!, released to further critical acclaim. His most recent release, a collaborative studio album with Danny Brown titled Scaring the Hoes, was released in 2023.


== Early life and education ==
Hendricks was born in Flatbush, Brooklyn, to Jamaican parents. He spent the majority of his childhood in Flatbush, before moving to Alabama at age 13, where he experienced a significant amount of racism that later had an intense effect on his music. Hendricks moved to Louisiana and enlisted in the United States Air Force at age 18. He served a tour of duty in Iraq and also spent time in Kuwait, Germany, Japan, and North Africa, before being honorably discharged after speaking up against his superiors' reported abuse. Though he previously claimed to have a master's degree in journalism, Hendricks has since clarified that, though having studied the subject while deployed, he was not officially awarded a degree. In April 2021, Hendricks revealed through social media that he had "a sexually, verbally, and physically abusive childhood."


== Career ==
Hendricks developed an interest in music production at the age of 15, and he began producing after he learned how to sample. Describing his production, Hendricks says "When I was first making beats, no one liked the beats. To this day I give people beats and they're just confused." He says "I started rapping because no one liked my beats." Noting that he started producing before he started rapping, Hendricks said "I'm a producer first kind of, and then a rapper second but I take both of them seriously."During his military stay in Japan, he was producing and writing music under the name Devon Hendryx. In 2015, he moved to Baltimore, where he began to make music under his moniker JPEGMafia,  under which he released his mixtape Communist Slow Jams in April 2015. Only a month later, he released his mixtape Darkskin Manson which was inspired by the Freddie Gray protests in Baltimore that were happening right as he had moved there.
Following a number of mixtapes, Hendricks released his debut studio album, Black Ben Carson, in February 2016 via Deathbomb Arc featuring a much harsher and more distorted sound than his other projects. Four months later, he released a collaborative EP with fellow Baltimore-based rapper Freaky titled The 2nd Amendment.
After less than 3 years living there, Hendricks moved from Baltimore to Los Angeles for his next studio album. In January 2018, he released his second studio album Veteran. In an article on Bandcamp, he said "I wanted to show I'm not just a one-trick pony. I always do weird shit. I usually just keep it to myself. This time, I just let the filter go." At the time of its release, Veteran was considered JPEGMAFIA's most experimental album to date, receiving widespread critical acclaim.After the release of Veteran, Hendricks started working on his next album. He recorded 93 songs, and whittled it down to 18 tracks. He mixed and mastered it at the end of Vince Staples' tour, posting percentage updates frequently on his Instagram. Prior to the release, he would label the project as a "disappointment" in interviews and his social media. The first single from the album, "Jesus Forgive Me, I Am a Thot", was released on August 13, 2019. He promoted the album by uploading a series of listening sessions to his YouTube channel where friends and artists such as Denzel Curry, Jeff Tweedy (of Wilco) and Hannibal Buress discussed and reacted to cuts off of the album. All My Heroes Are Cornballs was released on September 13, 2019, to further critical acclaim, and was his first album to chart. In October 2019, he embarked on the JPEGMafia Type Tour to support his new album.In 2020, Hendricks released several singles across the span of the year, and compiled them into an EP, aptly titled EP! It was released on Hendricks' Bandcamp page on November 6, and on streaming services with the addition of one extra single on December 10. On February 12, 2021, Hendricks released his second extended play, EP2! On October 2, Hendricks announced the album LP! , which was released on October 22, 2021, his birthday, to further acclaim. Due to sample-related issues, the album was released as two separate versions: LP! released on streaming services, and LP! (Offline) released for free on Bandcamp, YouTube, and Soundcloud. On February 24, 2022, Hendricks announced via Twitter that the songs not on the "Online" version had been released to streaming services as the OFFLINE! EP. On May 23, 2023, Hendricks released the complete "offline" version of the album to streaming platforms. On November, 9, 2022, Hendricks was dropping hints to dropping three albums for 2023.On January 15, 2023, Hendricks made a hint on his social media that he was working on a collaborative project with fellow rapper, Danny Brown. On January 20, 2023, Hendricks officially announced three albums will be dropping the same year. On February 10, 2023, Hendricks announced on his Twitter that the collaborative project with Danny Brown was finished, and is working on his second album for the year. On February 28, 2023, on The Danny Brown Show, both Hendricks and Brown announced that their collaborative project is named Scaring the Hoes Vol. 1, and played a sneak peek of the first single on the project. On March 13, 2023, the first single of the project called "Lean Beef Patty" was released to streaming services, and Hendricks announced that the collaborative project was set to release on March 24, 2023. The second single "SCARING THE HOES" was released to streaming services along with a music video. Three days later, the album was released. On July 11, an extended version of the album, titled Scaring the Hoes: DLC Pack, which included four more tracks, was released on streaming services.


== Artistry ==
His music has mostly been described as experimental hip-hop but has been said to incorporate a wide range of genres into his music such as trap, R&B, vaporwave, and noise rap.In an interview with Cambridge Union, Hendricks noted that his biggest influence is Kanye West. He states that one of his earliest influences was the rock group Hanson. He has also cited Ol' Dirty Bastard, Throbbing Gristle, Skinny Puppy, MF DOOM, Lil B, Chief Keef, Ice Cube, Rick Rubin, Cam'Ron, Björk, Janelle Monáe, Radiohead, The Backstreet Boys, Dirty Beaches and Arca as influences.


== In other media ==
In March 2020, Hendricks started a vlog series on his YouTube channel called HTBAR (How To Build A Relationship). The series features JPEGMafia talking to other artists and friends about various topics, mostly about music, life and politics. Each episode's soundtrack consist of unreleased songs, demos and instrumentals produced by JPEGMafia. Artists that have featured on the vlog series include Danny Brown, Kenny Beats, Lykke Li, Orville Peck, Saba and more. Hendricks has also appeared on The Cave, a YouTube series created by hip hop producer Kenny Beats.Hendricks is a fan of professional wrestling, and has incorporated several references to it in his songs. He made an appearance for wrestling promotion All Elite Wrestling (AEW) on an episode of their television show AEW Dynamite in September 2020. In 2021, AEW star Darby Allin was featured on Hendricks' thirteenth HTBAR episode.
Hendricks appeared on the 7th episode of season 5 of The Eric Andre Show, "Named After My Dad's Penis", and competed in the third Rapper Warrior Ninja sketch - a parody of the TV show Sasuke (which aired in the United States of America under the title Ninja Warrior) and its American spin-off American Ninja Warrior. Hendricks competed along with Lil Yachty, Murs, Trippie Redd, and Zack Fox in a challenge to cross a platform while freestyling and dodging various attacks. Hendricks fell off the platform while freestyling and failed.


== Personal life ==
Hendricks currently lives in Los Angeles, California.


== Discography ==

Studio albums

Black Ben Carson (2016)
Veteran (2018)
All My Heroes Are Cornballs (2019)
LP! (2021)Collaborative albums

The 2nd Amendment (2016) (with Freaky)
Scaring the Hoes (2023) (with Danny Brown)


== References ==


== External links ==
Official websiteShayna McHayle (born October 31, 1991), known professionally by her stage name Junglepussy, is an American rapper and actress from New York City. Her first mixtape Satisfaction Guaranteed was released in 2014. She has received recognition from different artists such as Erykah Badu and Lil' Kim.


== Early life ==
Shayna McHayle was born in East New York, Brooklyn on October 31, 1991, to a Jamaican father and a Trinidadian mother. After her parents got divorced, she was raised by her mother. Her mother encouraged her to be creative, allowing her to dye her hair as a form of self-expression, and encouraged McHayle and her sisters to practice self-love.She started rapping in high school with a group of friends called Primp, until graduation at 16. After graduating she attended the Fashion Institute of Technology, until getting a job in retail and starting a YouTube channel as a pastime.


== Career ==
In 2012, she released her first track as Junglepussy, "Cream Team" on YouTube, followed by "Stitches". In 2013, she performed alongside rapper Lil' Kim at Westway.In January 2014, Erykah Badu posted "Cream Team" on her Facebook and Twitter. On June 10, 2014, Junglepussy released her debut mixtape Satisfaction Guaranteed. The self-released 11 track compilation debuted on the Vice website. Junglepussy later released videos for the songs "Nah" and "Me" on her official YouTube channel.On August 20, 2015, she announced her next album would be titled Pregnant with Success, based on a lyric from "You Don't Know". On the same day, Junglepussy released a video for the assumed first single from the album, "Now or Later". The album was released on November 17, 2015. It was included on year-end lists by publications such as Fact, Spin, and Rolling Stone.On May 11, 2018, she released an album, JP3, which features guest appearances from Rico Love, Gangsta Boo, Wiki, and Quin. The album was leaked a day before its release. At Metacritic, which assigns a weighted average score out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics, JP3 received an average score of 83, based on 6 reviews, indicating "universal acclaim". Vibe included it on the "25 Hip-Hop Albums by Bomb Womxn of 2018" list. It was nominated by the American Association of Independent Music for its 2019 indie music-celebrating Libera Awards in the category of Best Hip-Hop/Rap Album.She made her acting debut in the comedy film Support the Girls (2018).In 2020, Junglepussy released JP4, her fourth studio album, which Guardian described as "a moody blend of nu-metal, alt-rock and funk". NME described the record as "stunning", praising McHayle for uniting "a multitude of sounds" and "scoping multiple genres" while still producing a cohesive and enduring record".The album features appearances from Gangsta Boo and Ian Isiah.
In 2022, Junglepussy released the 5 track “JP5000” project to high acclaim from publications such as Pitchfork, Metacritic, and more.


== Artistry ==


=== Musical style and influences ===
In a 2014 interview with Interview, Junglepussy cited she has taken inspiration from musicians such as Erykah Badu, Missy Elliott, Lady Saw, Kelis, Busta Rhymes, Vybz Kartel, Mavado, The Veronicas, Metric, Gossip, and Soulja Boy.


=== Public image ===
Junglepussy explained that as a young woman she was mostly influenced by the television show Moesha, starring singer/actress Brandy. She said in Paper: "Growing up, I would see Brandy on Moesha and see her keeping in her cornrows and her braids, but still flourish in her art and music, looking fly. I loved Moesha as a child, but now I take away something more special from it. Just because you're a black girl, it doesn't mean you need to only care about hair and makeup. Brandy cared about books, culture and where she was going — you can do both."


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===
Pregnant with Success (2015)
JP3 (2018)
JP4 (2020)


=== Mixtapes ===
Satisfaction Guaranteed (2014)
JP5000 (2022)


=== Singles ===
"You Don't Know" (2015)
"Now or Later" (2015)
"State of the Union" (2018)
"Showers" (2018)
"Trader Joe" (2018)
"They Know" (2018)
"Spiders" (2019)
"Main Attraction" (2020) 
"Arugula" (2020) 


=== Guest appearances ===
Dai Burger – "Titty Attack" from Raw Burger (2011)
Le1f – "Oils" from Tree House (2013)
Rome Fortune – "Payin' for It" from Drive, Thighs & Lies (2014)
Scooter Island – "#NOTYOURS" from Broad City (Original Series Soundtrack) (2015)
Shy Girls – "Always the Same" from 4WZ (2015)
Le1f – "Swirl" from Riot Boi (2015)
Lion Babe – "Still in Love" from Sun Joint (2016)
Brenmar – "Like a Hoe" from High End Times (2016)
Nick Hook – "Dive for You" from Relationships (2016)
Nadia Rose – "Breathe Slow" (2017)
Gabriel Garzón-Montano – "The Game Remix" (2018)
TXS – "Don't Tempt Me" from Everything Is Bigger (2018)
Pussy Riot - “Hangers” (2019)


== Filmography ==


=== Film ===
Support the Girls (2018), Danyelle
The Perfect Find (2023), Carlita


=== Television ===
Random Acts of Flyness (2018)


== References ==


== Further reading ==
C.M., Emmanuel (September 25, 2014). "The Break Presents: Junglepussy". XXL. Retrieved March 25, 2016.
Golden, Zara (November 20, 2015). "How I Live: Junglepussy". The Fader. Retrieved March 25, 2016.
Weiss, Dan (March 17, 2016). "Junglepussy: The Rapper Sliding Into Your DMs". Spin. Retrieved March 25, 2016.


== External links ==
Official website
Junglepussy discography at DiscogsJustin Gregory Smith (born January 8, 1978), known professionally as Just Blaze, is an American hip hop producer and DJ. Born in Paterson, New Jersey, Blaze attended Rutgers University for three years before dropping out to pursue his musical career. His stage name was inspired by the character Blaze Fielding from the Streets of Rage video game series. Blaze gained recognition as a producer for Roc-A-Fella Records in the early 2000s, utilizing the "chipmunk soul" sampling style popularized and used alongside Kanye West, that was prominent in the early to mid-2000s hip-hop scene. He appears in the video for the third single from Eminem's 2010 album Recovery entitled "No Love", which he produced. Blaze is also the founder and CEO of Fort Knocks Entertainment. He has also composed soundtracks for video games, and was a character in NBA Street Vol. 2 .His hometown of Paterson honored him in July 2018 with a key to the city in recognition of his "outstanding cultural contribution" to the city.


== Production discography ==


== Awards and nominations ==


=== Grammy Awards ===
The Grammy Awards are awarded annually by the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences. Just Blaze has been nominated 8 times.


== References ==


== External links ==
Just Blaze discography at MusicBrainzJoseph Williams Jr. (born June 22, 1965), better known by the stage name Just-Ice, is an American rapper from New York City.


== Career ==
In 1986 he was charged with the murder of drug dealer Ludlaw DeSouza, but later proven innocent. His third album, The Desolate One (1989), had minor success in the United Kingdom, reaching no. 16 on the UK Independent Chart.Williams relocated from the Ft. Greene area in Brooklyn to the Castle Hill section of the Bronx in his early adolescent years. He currently resides in the Bronx which he considers his hometown.
Bradley Nowell (Sublime) brought Just-Ice's vinyl record The Desolate One to KROQ 106.7 FM Radio Station in California in the 1990s at the height of the band's success and proclaimed "You can drop the needle anywhere on this record and I guarantee you, GOLD!"  Of which, the DJ allowed and played "NA TOUCH DA JUST".


== Discography ==
Back to the Old School (1986)
Kool & Deadly (1987)
The Desolate One (1989)
Masterpiece (1990)
Gun Talk (1993)
Kill the Rhythm (Like a Homicide) (1995)
VII (1998)
Gangster Boogie (2008) (digital download only)
32 Degrees (2009) (digital download only)
The Just-Ice and KRS-One EP Vol.1 (2010) (digital download only)


== References ==


== External links ==
AllMusic.com Biography - Just-IceDavid Wallace III (born December 16, 2004), known professionally as Kashdami (often stylized as KA$HDAMI), is an American rapper from Prince George’s County, Maryland. He rose to popularity with his songs "Reparations", "Look N The Mirror" and "14" with tana which gained attraction on SoundCloud and TikTok. He released his first major label mixtape Epiphany in June 2021


== Early life ==
David Wallace III was born on December 16, 2004, in Las Vegas, Nevada, and was raised by his parents. He gained early experience with music through his father, who owned a studio and worked in the industry. He died when Wallace was seven. His family moved to Maryland around this time. Wallace has a twin sister.


== Career ==


=== 2018: Beginnings ===
Wallace started making music at the age of eight through the now-defunct video chat app ooVoo. At thirteen, he bought a microphone and recorded on his mother's computer. He released the song "Kappin Up" and Findin' Out in 2018 but became demotivated and took a break. Wallace returned when "Kappin Up" became popular on TikTok in 2020, with the help of a music video by WorldStarHipHop.


=== 2020: Breakthrough ===
With newfound motivation, Wallace released the mixtapes #KashDontMiss and 16 in 2020, which grew his online fanbase. In January 2021, his breakout single "Reparations!" released, which gained popularity on various platforms including TikTok and SoundCloud. His follow-up single "Look N The Mirror!" did similarly well. Wallace signed a deal with Republic Records in May 2021.


=== 2021–present: Epiphany, HYPERNOVA, WORLD DAMINATION, and 18 ===
On June 2, 2021, the mixtape Epiphany released through Republic Records, with features from tana, yvngxchris, SSGKobe, Riovaz and D'mari Harris Wallace and fellow rapper tana, formerly BabySantana, featured on the Lyrical Lemonade YouTube channel with their track "14". on July 20, 2021. In September, Wallace released the single "Public", and followed it up with "Intermission" in October. They were the lead singles to his next mixtape Hypernova, it was released on November 12, 2021, with a sole feature from Trippie Redd.In March, Wallace released the single "posed2be" and followed it with "Phoenix" in April. He Later released "Famine" with XLOVCLO and then released the final single of his album WORLD DAMINATION with "komission" on September 9. A week later, WORLD DAMINATION was released on September 16, 2022. WORLD DAMINATION features the following artists: midwxst, XLOVCLO, NoCap, ilyfall and Slump6s. After had releasing a slew of singles off SoundCloud, on December 16, 2022, Wallace released an EP titled 18. Matt Ox serves as the EP's sole feature.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===


=== Mixtapes ===


=== Extended Plays ===


== References ==Shaun Shiller Fequiere (August 10, 1966 – December 18, 2021), known by his stage name Kangol Kid, was an American hip hop producer, songwriter, break dancer, and emcee.  Kangol is best known as a member of the old school hip hop group UTFO.Kangol Kid was the first hip-hop artist to endorse a product through his official sponsorship with Kangol headwear. His signature hat has been inducted into the Collection of the Smithsonian National Museum of African American History and Culture.Kangol Kid is considered to be one of the "pioneers of hip-hop".


== Early years ==
Fequiere was born in Brooklyn, New York to Haitian parents. Fequiere shied away from his Haitian heritage growing up.He acquired his nickname, The Kangol Kid, from neighborhood friends during the early 1980s, because of the many Kangol hats he owned and wore.  He was also officially sponsored by Kangol Headwear, Inc.He was signed to his first record label deal at age 17, without having had his own legal representation at the time.


== UTFO member ==
Kangol Kid was originally a breakdancer along with his dance partner, Doctor Ice.  In 1984, UTFO became one of the most popular rap and breakdance acts in the country on the strength of their breakout single, "Roxanne, Roxanne".During the mid-1980s, as "Roxanne, Roxanne" gained popularity and chart position, UTFO was voted best rap group, at the 1988 Urban Music Awards, had featured spots on Don Cornelius' Soul Train, The Phil Donahue Show, and performed live for actors such as Dustin Hoffman, and Tony Danza.  UTFO was the first rap group to perform at Harlem's Apollo Theater as they opened for Hall & Oates and the Temptations' Eddie Kendricks and David Ruffin.In 1987, UTFO released their highest-charting album, Lethal, featuring the rock group Anthrax on the title track.


== Production, management, and songwriting ==
In 1985, Fequiere wrote and composed "Private Property" on the Lisa Lisa & Cult Jam with Full Force album.Later that year, he managed and produced the rap group, Whistle.Fequiere worked as a producer, composer, performer, artist manager, and songwriter. He was the President of music production company, Kangol's Kreations, Inc., and CEO of his Public Relations firm, Kreative Media Group. Fequiere lectured at high schools and colleges nationwide on the business of music.In 2012, Fequiere became the first rapper to be honored by the American Cancer Society.


== Personal life and death ==
Fequiere was an advocate and fundraiser for breast cancer research through the Mama Luke Foundation in collaboration with the American Cancer Society. He organized and participated in events throughout the country to raise money for research to fight breast cancer. Fequiere was also a proud father of 4, including 3 sons (T. Shaun, AJ, and Giovanni) and 1 daughter (Amancia) (https://www.instagram.com/p/CVxi4hFL-Sd/ 
On December 18, 2021, Fequiere died from colon cancer at the age of 55, at a hospital in Manhasset, New York.


== References ==


== External links ==
Kangol Kid discography at Discogs
Kangol at IMDb
Kangol at IMDb
Kangol Kid at IMDbKatari Terrance Cox (born December 30, 1976) better known by his stage name Kastro, is an American rapper. A cousin of 2Pac, Kastro would perform alongside him in the former's rap group, the Outlawz, and is featured on many of the late rapper's songs such as "Made Niggaz", and "Hail Mary". When he was in elementary school, he introduced his friend, and future Outlawz rapper, Malcolm Greenridge, later named E.D.I. Mean, to 2Pac.


== Career ==
Kastro began rapping under the name K-Dog, in a rap group with Big Malcolm (E.D.I. Mean), and Young Hollywood (Yaki Kadafi). He later rapped on some of Tupac Shakur's songs during the studio sessions for his album Strictly 4 My N.I.G.G.A.Z.. Eventually, Mutah (Napoleon) was added to the group and they became known as Dramacydal. K-Dog was featured on the song "Outlaw" from Tupac's platinum album Me Against The World, released on March 14, 1995. He was also featured on the songs "Tradin War Stories", "When We Ride", and "Thug Passion" from Tupac's diamond certified double LP All Eyez On Me, released on February 13, 1996. During the recording sessions for this  album, Tupac gave K-Dog the name Kastro, naming him after Cuban revolutionary Fidel Castro.On June 4, 1996, Kastro featured on Tupac's "Hit 'Em Up", appearing in the music video, alongside the rest of the Outlawz. The song was the B-side to Shakur's "How Do U Want It" single and was a vicious diss song aimed at Bad Boy Entertainment, Mobb Deep, and Chino XL. The song is widely considered one of the most aggressive hip-hop diss tracks ever recorded. Kastro's other features include "Hail Mary" and "Life of An Outlaw" from Shakur's multi-platinum album
The Don Killuminati: The 7 Day Theory, which was recorded over the course of seven days in August 1996.On September 7, 1996, Tupac was fatally wounded by gunshots on the Las Vegas Strip and was rushed to a hospital at the University of Las Vegas. He died six days later on September 13, at the age of 25. Kastro was present when the shooting took place. He was in the car directly behind Tupac but could not identify the shooters.


== Discography ==


=== With Outlawz ===
Studio Albums
Still I Rise (1999)
Ride wit Us or Collide wit Us (2000)
Novakane (2001)
Neva Surrenda (2002)
Outlaw 4 Life: 2005 A.P. (2005)
We Want In: The Street LP (2008)Mixtapes
Outlaw Warriorz Vol. 1 (with DJ Warrior) (2004)
New World Order (with DJ Ipodd) (2005)
Can't Turn Back (2007)
Outlaw Culture Vol. 1 (2009)
Outlaw Culture Vol. 2 (2009)
Outlaw Culture Vol. 3 (2009)Other albums
Still I Rise (Part 2) (2002)
Retribution: The Lost Album (2006)
Ghetto Monopoly (2007)
The Lost Songs Vol. 1 (2010)
The Lost Songs Vol. 2 (2010)


=== With E.D.I. ===
Studio Albums
Blood Brothers (2002)


== References ==


== External links ==
OutlawzMedia.net
Kastro discography at DiscogsKeith Grayson (August 14, 1966 – April 17, 2022), professionally known as DJ Kay Slay, was an American disc jockey (DJ) from New York City. He is referred to by The New York Times as "Hip Hop's One-Man Ministry of Insults". He released four successful studio albums, The Streetsweeper, Vol. 1, The Streetsweeper, Vol. 2, The Champions: North Meets South (with Greg Street), and More Than Just a DJ.


== Early life ==
Grayson was born August 14, 1966, in New York City. He was originally a prominent graffiti artist, having been featured in the 1983 hip hop documentary, Style Wars. One of Grayson's better known tags was "Dez". As a youth involved in New York's flourishing hip hop scene, Keith witnessed firsthand the ascent of legendary disc jockeys such as Grandmaster Flash, Grand Wizzard Theodore, and Kool DJ Red Alert, in the late 1970s and into the 1980s. "I didn't so much set out to be a DJ," he said. "It was just something to do that was fun and that I enjoyed doing." With the decline of the graffiti movement in the late 1980s, Dez began dealing with narcotics and consequently ended up in jail by the late 1980s. Grayson was released from jail in 1990, and claimed to have abstained from using drugs thereafter. He hailed from the East River Houses located in East Harlem, New York.In the early years of his life, he also met long-time friend Sauce Money, whom he was friends with until his death.


== Career ==


=== 2003–2009: Streetsweeper series ===
DJ Kay Slay released his debut album, The Streetsweeper, Vol. 1, on May 20, 2003. In the summer of 2003, Kay Slay released a single, accompanied by a music video, for a song titled "Too Much For Me". The single, which features a chorus sung by then-up-and-coming singer Amerie, also features verses from American rappers Birdman, Nas, and Foxy Brown. The song peaked at number 53 on the US Billboard Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart, making it the DJ's highest-charting single to date. The single's music video includes cameo appearances by Swizz Beatz, N.O.R.E., Raekwon, WC, and Lloyd Banks. Although the song was not a major success, its music video was aired on MTV Jams and BET. The "Too Much For Me" video did not feature Nas (because of Nas' solo projects) or Baby; so Loon was featured instead. This replacement started a feud between Nas and Kay Slay.
On March 30, 2004, Kay Slay's second album The Streetsweeper, Vol. 2, was released. Another single and video were released for "Who Gives A...Where You From" with Three 6 Mafia, which peaked at number 89 on the Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs. Kay Slay and the song were featured on the 2004 NFL Street video game.


=== 2010–2022: More Than Just a DJ and Rhyme or Die ===
After releasing More Than Just a DJ in 2010, Rhyme or Die was released. The first album's initial two singles "60 Second Assassins" featuring Busta Rhymes, Layzie Bone, Twista, and Jaz-O and "The Kings of the Streets" featuring DJ Khaled, DJ Drama, DJ Doo Wop, and Fly Nate were released in 2011. In 2013, "About That Life" featuring Fabolous, T-Pain, Rick Ross, Nelly, and French Montana was released as a single from Rhyme or Die. It debuted and peaked at #54 on the Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart, making it one of Kay Slay's most successful singles to date. In the beginning of 2014, "Free Again" was released featuring Fat Joe and 50 Cent, which came as a surprise for some seeing as how they had "beef" before, but  later reconciled. In 2021, Dj Kay Slay released the track "Rolling 110 Deep" which featured 110 hip hop artists with contributing verses from Ice-T, Shaq, Coke La Rock, KRS-One, Kool G Rap, Ghostface Killah, Roy Jones Jr, Omar Epps, and others.


== Illness and death ==
In January  2022, DJ Kay Slay's brother said he was in the hospital after contracting COVID-19, but was "in a recovery state". He died from COVID-19 in New York City, on April 17, 2022, at the age of 55.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===


=== Collaborative albums ===


=== Mixtapes ===


== Singles ==


== References ==


== External links ==
DJ Kay Slay's Hot 97 web page biography
DJ Kay Slay charts:
The information in the personal section is from Circuit City's DJ Kay Slay bio Circuit City-Music: DJ KayslayMatthew Jefferson, also known as Kemba, formerly known as YC the Cynic, (born November 21, 1990) is an American hip hop recording artist from Hunts Point, Bronx, New York. He was named one of the "Top 5 Underground Hip-Hop Artists in New York" by Deli Magazine (2010) and was ordained "DXNext" by the hip hop website HipHopDX (2011). Kemba talks openly about his sense of responsibility to the art form, “It feels like there’s a void in the Bronx, and I don’t necessarily feel like I have to fill it, but I feel like I could."
He was also a feature on XXXTENTACION's final posthumous album, Bad Vibes Forever.


== Musical career ==
You're Welcome (2010)
Released on February 9, 2010, You're Welcome is YC The Cynic's musical debut. Featuring mostly covers of 1990s classics, You're Welcome was an act of homage to those that paved the way for him. Justin Hunte of BrooklynBodega described You're Welcome as being “loaded with personality, slick wordplay, pristine beat selection, and lyricism beyond his years.” 
Manny Faces of Birthplace Magazine said "lyrically, YC is intelligent and rocks with diction. He enunciates well, emitting just the right amount of emotion for each track, while skillfully staying on message."  DJBooth.net declared “YC’s heavily-alliterated, elaborately-rhymed flows are undeniably dope.”You're Welcome served as a great look into the talent and potential of the up-and-coming emcee.
Fall FWD (2011)
Released on March 1, 2011, Fall FWD is the second mixtape by YC the Cynic. Containing mostly original production, Fall FWD shows the growth and song-writing ability of the young artist. Derick Fortin of LA2Day said "Fall FWD’s lyrical complexity, aesthetically pleasing flow, diverse subjects, and experimental production is everything true hip-hop fans have been looking for" while JT Langley of Oology says "lyrical content aside, YC shares himself as a patient slow-paced linguist throughout the tape, focusing with precision to weave commentary among clever metaphor, while riding a loose rhyme-scheme that holds the ability to evolve smoothly at the turn of each verse without any obvious signifiers."After the success of Fall FWD, YC the Cynic has performed with the stage with the likes of Bun B, Curren$y, Joell Ortiz, Kendrick Lamar, Mac Miller, and Big Sean and most notably, a headline show for his most recent release, Fall FWD, at Southpaw in Park Slope, Brooklyn.  He also performed at the closing ceremony of Fat Beats in NYC.  In March 2011, YC the Cynic wrapped a nationwide tour with J.Live that included six performances at the SXSW Festival in Austin, Texas. YC's artist resume includes features in OkayPlayer, AllHipHop, ACT LIVE MUSIC, 2dopeboyz and OK-Tho whom named him one of the Top 25 artists of 2013.GNK (2013)
Released on August 26, 2013, GNK is the last project released under the name YC the Cynic. GNK is a collaborative project with Frank Drake (Producer).
NEGUS (2016)
Under his new name, Kemba released the album Negus on June 30, 2016. In December 2016, Kemba was interviewed by Peter Rosenberg on Real Late W/ Peter Rosenberg. Only nine days after the interview was uploaded to YouTube, Kendrick Lamar invited Kemba on to the stage to rap at Brooklyn's Music Hall of Williamsburg for an American Express sponsored concert that was live-streamed on Facebook. On December 27, 2016, Kemba uploaded a video onto Instagram showing him on the set for Anderson .Paak's "Already" music video. On December 28, 2016, rumors began to surface that Kemba had signed to Top Dawg Entertainment.
In 2019, he was featured on the final posthumous album from the late Floridian rapper XXXTENTACION, Bad Vibes Forever, with fellow New York native, Joey Badass.
GILDA (2019)
In 2019, Kemba released Gilda, his major label debut. The album is named for, and is a tribute to, Kemba's mother, who passed away two years prior to the album's release.
In 2020, Kemba appeared as himself in the film The 40-Year-Old Version In 2020, Kemba's music video ''Nobody I Can Trust'' directed by Tomson Tee won the Best Narrative category and placed second for the Best Music Video at the Berlin Music Video Awards.


== Rebel Diaz Arts Collective ==
In addition, YC the Cynic is a founding member of the RDACBX, Rebel Diaz Arts Collective. Created in March 2009 by the hip hop duo Rebel Diaz, the Rebel Diaz Arts Collective (RDACBX) is a hip hop community center that utilizes all five elements to spread their message about the injustices faced by oppressed groups while providing a safe haven for young people to perform and learn. Some of the RDACBX's resources include a performance space, a multimedia studio, a computer lab, and an art gallery. In "building community through the arts," RDACBX serves as a safe space for young people to learn and perform, hosting workshops in addition to providing artistic space. YC describes his participation in the collective: "We’ve been doing rallies, which are all based on music, but it’s so much deeper. Music is just an acceptable form…it’s inspirational. We use that to better the community and the world at large." In June 2010, along with RDACBX, YC the Cynic toured California, and Detroit, for the United States Social Forum.


== Influences ==
YC The Cynic has openly stated his influences and how they influence him. "I study specific emcees for specific reasons. Like, I've the [sic] importance of enunciation is huge. I look to KRS-One for that." He has also said that he looked to Eminem for multi-syllabic rhythmic patters and "inners," which are rhymes in the beginning or middle of a line. Although KRS-One and Eminem have influenced him, he's also named Mos Def and Andre 3000 as well, with his biggest influence being Cee-Lo Green of Goodie Mob and Gnarls Barkley. "Cee-lo use of melody, song-writing ability, and just the strength and feeling of the words he chooses is pretty invaluable," says the Bronx native.
YC the Cynic has been lauded by some of the most notable names in the hip hop industry.  In his "DXNext" feature, the writer described him as being "a standout in the cutthroat New York City underground scene."  Brooklyn Bodega described YC as being “loaded with personality, slick wordplay, pristine beat selection, and lyricism beyond his years” while DJBooth.net declares “YC’s heavily-alliterated, elaborately-rhymed flows are undeniably dope.”


== Discography ==
GNK (2013) (as YC the Cynic)
Negus (2016)
Gilda (2019)


== References ==


== External links ==
YC The Cynic on Tumblr
YC The Cynic on BandCamp
DXnext: YC The CynicJames Harvey Kennedy (born May 25, 1970) is an American actor and comedian. He has played Randy Meeks in the Scream franchise (1996–2000) and a multitude of characters in The Jamie Kennedy Experiment (2002–2004) on The WB. His other film roles include Romeo + Juliet (1996), Bowfinger (1999), Malibu's Most Wanted (2003), Finding Bliss (2009), and Good Deeds (2012).
He has starred in the CBS drama Ghost Whisperer (2005–2010), provided voice-work for The Cleveland Show (2009–2013) and regularly tours as a stand-up comedian and podcaster.


== Early life ==
Kennedy was born on May 25, 1970, in Upper Darby Township, a suburb of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Kennedy was raised Catholic. He attended and graduated from Monsignor Bonner High School in 1988. After high school, Kennedy began his career as a Hollywood extra. Meanwhile, he worked on voice impersonations.


== Career ==
When Kennedy first arrived in Los Angeles, he became a professional Hollywood extra.
After a few years of struggling, Kennedy was unable to find an agent and worked as a host at Red Lobster. He auditioned for over 80 commercials and could not book one. He then took a job as a telemarketer and learned that he had a talent for selling things. Kennedy then thought that if he could sell anything, "why not sell myself?", becoming his own agent.Kennedy created a false persona, screen agent "Marty Power", to attract the attention of real agents and managers over the phone, who would later book his performances. He came to prominence in the late 1990s for playing Randy Meeks in the Scream film series. His lead role as Tim Avery in Son of the Mask earned him a Golden Raspberry Award nomination for Worst Actor, he would later voice his experiences with the film on his YouTube channel in the later years after its release. The film would also go on to inspire Kennedy to host the 2007 documentary Heckler after feeling hurt by the film's poor reception in which some reviewers attacked him personally.
Kennedy formed a production company called Wannabe Producers, alongside Josh through which he has produced the shows The Jamie Kennedy Experiment, Blowin' Up, The Starlet, and Living with Fran created by David Garrett. Following Malibu's Most Wanted, in which he both wrote and starred, Kennedy co-wrote the MTV show Blowin' Up (2006) featuring his friend, Stu Stone.
Kennedy lent his voice to the videogame ESPN NFL 2K5 as a celebrity adversary with his own football team, the Upper Darby Cheesesteaks. He is also unlockable as a free agent tight end in season mode. His stint as Activision's emcee at Electronic Entertainment Expo 2007, however, drew much criticism not only for his ignorance of the industry, but also for appearing to perform drunk as he insulted the audience. In a video uploaded to YouTube on June 14, 2021, Kennedy claimed that Activision had scrapped his script at the last minute and he was ad-libbing his jokes while suffering from burnout.While working on his film Malibu's Most Wanted, Kennedy wrote an autobiography titled, Wannabe: A Hollywood Experiment. The book chronicles his life in Hollywood as he attempts to become a star. It gives background on his life and family and quickly dives into his adventures. It tells of such things as Kennedy's living conditions in the Hollywood slums, his dilapidated car, and his kidney issues.A performer of stand-up comedy, he is also known for his sketch performances on his television reality show, The Jamie Kennedy Experiment, which became the WB Network's highest-ranking new show in 2002, but which was cancelled in April 2004 due to falling viewership. In 2006, Jizzy Entertainment released Unwashed: The Stand-Up Special. In 2008, Kennedy released the documentary Heckler, about the plight of stand-up comics versus their often-aggressive audiences. In 2007 and 2017, he made two appearances in Criminal Minds as a cannibal satanist serial killer.
From 2008 to 2010, Kennedy played psychology professor Eli James in the CBS drama Ghost Whisperer. From 2009 to 2013, he was in the TV series, The Cleveland Show, playing Roberta Tubbs' boyfriend.He also stars in Nicktoons' Fanboy & Chum Chum as Kyle, an insecure boy wizard who loathes the fun-loving Fanboy and Chum Chum, but who secretly yearns for their friendship. In April 2010, sources reported that Kennedy would very likely return to the Scream franchise to star in the fourth installment; however, according to Scream screenwriter Kevin Williamson, plans were never made for him to rejoin the franchise, attributing the misinformation to a fabrication by Kennedy.On December 31, 2012, Kennedy hosted and produced First Night 2013 with Jamie Kennedy, a New Year's Eve television special widely considered one of the worst shows of all time. His film Lost & Found in Armenia, in which he plays an American tourist who ends up in an Armenian village, accused of being a Turkish spy, later opened to select theatres on June 7, 2013. His film Buddy Hutchins, in which Kennedy plays a down-on-his-luck recovering alcoholic, was released in 2015. In 2015, he portrayed Frump in the Colton Tran adventure mystery film Gloom and Beach Patrolman Alex in Allegra Pictures' horror film The Sand. In 2015, he also starred as Travis Welker in Tremors 5: Bloodlines and as Rob in Rivers 9.Kennedy played NARAL Pro-Choice America founder Larry Lader in the 2020 film Roe v. Wade, which stars a predominantly conservative ensemble cast. In an interview with The Daily Beast, which noted the film depicts Lader as "a shady figure pulling strings from behind the scenes who treats abortions as a money-making operation," Kennedy said he appeared in the film to perform in a dramatic role that he is not normally offered, and personally identifies as pro-choice, and that, "it’s also not fair for people to think that because I’m in a project with them that I’m like that, or that I believe in this stuff".


== Personal life ==
Kennedy dated his Ghost Whisperer co-star Jennifer Love Hewitt from March 2009 to March 2010.Kennedy was active in California's tourism campaign, having appeared in several commercials with Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger.


== Filmography ==


== Discography ==
Blowin' Up (2006)


== Awards and nominations ==


== References ==


== External links ==

Jamie Kennedy at IMDbCameron Jibril Thomaz (born September 8, 1987), better known by his stage name Wiz Khalifa, is an American rapper. He released his debut album, Show and Prove, in 2006 and signed to Warner Bros. Records in 2007. His Eurodance-influenced single "Say Yeah" received urban radio airplay, charting on the Rhythmic Top 40 and Hot Rap Tracks charts in 2008, becoming his first minor hit.Thomaz parted ways with Warner Bros. and released his second album, Deal or No Deal, independently in November 2009. He then released two additional mixtapes until signing with Atlantic Records in July 2010. Thomaz then adopted an urban hip hop-influenced approach with his debut single for Atlantic, "Black and Yellow". The song, a tribute to his hometown of Pittsburgh, debuted at number one-hundred and eventually reached number one on the Billboard Hot 100, also earning him two Grammy Award nominations. "Black and Yellow" became the lead single for his third album and major label debut, Rolling Papers (2011), which was released to commercial success despite mixed reviews, spawning the Top 40 singles "Roll Up" and "No Sleep".His fourth album, O.N.I.F.C. saw similar reception upon release in December 2012, preceded by the singles "Work Hard, Play Hard" and "Remember You" (featuring the Weeknd). Thomaz released his fifth album Blacc Hollywood in August 2014; it became his first album peak atop the Billboard 200 and was supported by the lead single "We Dem Boyz". In March 2015, he released "See You Again" (featuring Charlie Puth) for the soundtrack of the film Furious 7. A tribute to late actor Paul Walker, it peaked the Hot 100 for twelve non-consecutive weeks and earned three Grammy Award nominations, becoming Thomaz's most successful record to date.Outside of music, Thomaz has acted in television shows Dickinson and The Eric Andre Show, co-starred with Snoop Dogg in the stoner comedy film Mac & Devin Go to High School (2012), as well as having voice roles in the animated series American Dad!, Duncanville, and Big City Greens. He has also founded the company Taylor Gang Entertainment in 2008, a record label that has signed artists such as Juicy J, Ty Dolla Sign, and Berner, among others. Known for his abundant usage of cannabis, Thomaz released his own cannabis brand, Khalifa Kush, in 2016, which expanded to release in nationwide dispensaries in 2022.


== Early life ==
Khalifa was born Cameron Jibril Thomaz on September 8, 1987, in Minot, North Dakota, to parents serving in the military. His parents divorced when Khalifa was about three years old. He was a military brat, frequently moving around with his parents' military service. Khalifa lived in Germany, the United Kingdom, and Japan before settling in Pittsburgh with his mother in around 1996 where he attended Taylor Allderdice High School. Soon after moving to Pittsburgh, Khalifa began to write and perform his own lyrics before he was a teenager.His stage name is derived from Khalifa, an Arabic word meaning "successor", and wisdom, which was shortened to Wiz when Khalifa was a young boy. Khalifa stated to Spinner.com that the name also came from being called "young Wiz 'cause I was good at everything I did, and my granddad is Muslim, so he gave me that name; he felt like that's what I was doing with my music." He got a tattoo of his stage name on his 17th birthday.By the age of 15, he was regularly recording his music at a local studio called I.D. Labs. Impressed by the young teen's talent, E. Dan, the owner of the studio offered Khalifa an intern job at the studio in exchange for free recording time. Dan, being a veteran of the Pittsburgh hip-hop scene, would help develop and mentor the young artist early on in his career.


== Career ==


=== 2005–2008: Early mixtapes and Show and Prove ===
Rostrum Records president Benjy Grinberg first heard about Wiz Khalifa in 2004 when the rapper's contribution to a mixtape of various new Pittsburgh artists attracted his interest. When Grinberg finally met the 16-year-old artist, he immediately decided he wanted to work with him, later telling HitQuarters: "Even though he wasn't all the way developed you could just tell that he was a diamond in the rough, and that with some polishing, guidance and backing he could become something special." Khalifa signed to the label shortly after and began a seven-year period of artist development. Khalifa released his first mixtape, Prince of the City: Welcome to Pistolvania, in 2005. The mixtape paved the way for his first full-length album entitled Show and Prove in 2006. Khalifa was declared an "artist to watch" that year in Rolling Stone magazine.In 2007, Khalifa signed to Warner Bros. Records and released two mixtapes through Rostrum Records: Grow Season, hosted by DJ Green Lantern and released on July 4, 2007, and Prince of the City 2, released on November 20, 2007. His debut Warner Bros. single "Say Yeah" reached number 25 on the Billboard Rhythmic Top 40 music chart and number 20 on Billboard's Hot Rap Tracks. The song samples "Better Off Alone" by Alice Deejay. Khalifa's vocals from "Say Yeah" appear near the end of Pittsburgh mashup producer Girl Talk's 2008 album, Feed the Animals, over music from Underworld's "Born Slippy", Usher's "Love in This Club", and the Cure's "In Between Days". Khalifa appeared with The Game, David Banner and Play-n-Skillz at U92's Summer Jam at the USANA Amphitheatre in West Valley City, Utah on August 2, 2008. Khalifa released the mixtapes Star Power in September 2008, and Flight School in April 2009 on Rostrum Records.
Khalifa parted ways with Warner Bros. Records in July 2009 after numerous delays in releasing his planned debut album for the label, First Flight. Khalifa stated to the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette that, "I learned a lot during my time there and matured as an artist during the process. I'm happy to be moving on with all of my material and having the chance to be in control of my next moves". Khalifa appeared with Girl Talk, Modey Lemon, Donora, Grand Buffet, and Don Caballero at the Amphitheatre at Station Square in Pittsburgh on July 31, 2009, where he announced that his relationship with Warner Bros. was over.


=== 2009–2010: Deal or No Deal and signing with Atlantic Records ===
Continuing his association with Rostrum Records, Khalifa released the single "Teach U to Fly", and the mixtape How Fly, a collaboration with New Orleans rapper Curren$y, on August 9, 2009. Khalifa introduced a more melodic style on the mixtape, alternating between singing and rapping. He opened for Wu-Tang Clan member U-God at the 2009 CMJ Music Marathon in New York City. Khalifa released the mixtape Burn After Rolling on November 2, 2009, where he raps over familiar beats from other artists, including the songs "If I Were A Boy" and "Diva" by Beyoncé, "Walking on a Dream" by Empire of the Sun, "Luchini AKA This Is It" by Camp Lo, and  "Best I Ever Had" by Drake. Khalifa released his second album, Deal or No Deal, on November 24, 2009.Khalifa performed at Emo's in Austin, Texas in March 2010 as part of the 2010 South by Southwest Music Festival. He appeared on the cover of XXL magazine that same month, for the magazine's annual list of Top 10 Freshman, which included Donnis, J. Cole, Pill, Freddie Gibbs, and Fashawn. Wiz Khalifa was named 2010 "Rookie Of The Year" by "The Source", with alongside Rick Ross, "The Man Of The Year". He toured with rapper Yelawolf on a 20-date tour, the Deal Or No Deal Tour. Khalifa released the free mixtape Kush and Orange Juice for download on June 14, 2010. Due to Khalifa's devoted grassroots fan base, the mixtape became the No. 1 trending topic on Twitter with the hash tag #kushandorangejuice, and "Kush and Orange Juice download" ranked No. 1 on Google's hot search trends.Citing music industry insiders, New York magazine wrote that Khalifa signed with Atlantic Records in April 2010, although the rapper did not confirm it. He stated to AllHipHop in June 2010 that he was working on a new album, but was weighing his options and had not yet decided on a label to distribute it. Khalifa confirmed to MTV on July 30 that he was signing an Atlantic Records deal.
Khalifa was featured in a remix and video for the 2010 Rick Ross single "Super High", alongside Curren$y. He guested on the mixtape Grey Goose, Head Phones, and Thirsty Women  by St. Louis rapper M.C, and was featured on the track "The Breeze (Cool)" on rapper Wale's August 2010 mixtape More About Nothing. Khalifa was named MTV's Hottest Breakthrough MC of 2010, winning with nearly 70,000 votes, and beating out finalists Nicki Minaj, J. Cole, Travis Porter, and Diggy Simmons.Khalifa appeared at the Soundset 2010 festival in May 2010 in Minneapolis, Minnesota, alongside Method Man & Redman, Del the Funky Homosapien and Hieroglyphics, Atmosphere, Murs, Cage, and others. He performed at the 2010 Rock the Bells festival, along with hip hop veterans Wu-Tang Clan, Snoop Dogg, Lauryn Hill, A Tribe Called Quest, Rakim, KRS-One, Jedi Mind Tricks and Slick Rick. Khalifa declined an invitation to tour with rapper Drake and launched his own Waken Baken Tour, a 50-city national tour with rapper Yelawolf. His official DJ on the tour was DJ Bonics.The tour, scheduled to last from September to November 2010, sold out every venue. In November 2010, during his "Waken Baken" tour at East Carolina University, Khalifa was arrested for possession and trafficking of marijuana. He was released the next morning after a $300K bail, and resumed his tour. Khalifa performed in a cypher during the 2010 BET Hip-Hop Awards.


=== 2010–2012: Mainstream success, Rolling Papers and O.N.I.F.C. ===
Khalifa released "Black and Yellow", his first single for Rostrum/Atlantic, produced by Stargate, which has received radio airplay. The single peaked at number one on the US Billboard Hot 100; the title of the song refers to the colors of the City of Pittsburgh. Khalifa released his debut album with Atlantic Records in 2011. He appeared with Curren$y on the track "Scaling the Building" on producer Ski Beatz' 2010 album, 24 Hour Karate School.On March 29, 2011, Khalifa released his first studio album, Rolling Papers in the US. The album debuted at number two on the US Billboard 200 chart, with first-week sales of 197,000 copies in the United States. On March 31, 2011, Khalifa performed at Emory University in Atlanta, Georgia as part of the school's annual Dooley's Weekend. On June 26, 2011, Khalifa was nominated and won Best New Artist at the BET Awards of 2011.Khalifa collaborated with British rapper Tinie Tempah. Tinie announced in an interview with Rolling Stone that his next single is to be called "Till I'm Gone" and would feature Wiz Khalifa and was produced by Stargate. The single and the video song were released at the end of June 2011.On April 11, 2012, Khalifa announced that he will release his second studio album titled Only Nigga In First Class but that it will be abbreviated as O.N.I.F.C. for release to mainstream markets. O.N.I.F.C. debuted at number two with 131,000 in first week sales. The album has spawned two singles "Work Hard, Play Hard" and "Remember You" both receiving good commercial acclaim and the former going platinum. Wiz spoke with rapper 50 Cent, with whom he collaborated on the song "Telescope", about making a movie together. Also in 2012, Maroon 5 released their single "Payphone" featuring Khalifa, the lead single to their album Overexposed.


=== 2013–present: Blacc Hollywood and Rolling Papers 2 ===
In April 2013, Khalifa revealed that after having his son he decided to work on a new album that he was planning to release in 2013. On April 17, 2013, Wiz Khalifa and Curren$y announced that they will drop their collaboration EP Live in Concert on April 20, 2013. The EP featured seven new songs. On June 24, 2013, he announced that his fifth studio album would be titled Blacc Hollywood and would be released in 2013. On September 3, 2013, Khalifa revealed he had recorded songs with Miley Cyrus and Juicy J for Blacc Hollywood. In October 2013, Mannie Fresh confirmed that he provided production for the album.On February 11, 2014, Khalifa released Blacc Hollywood's first single titled "We Dem Boyz". On March 31, 2015, Wiz Khalifa released an EP with fellow Taylor Gang artist Ty Dolla $ign, Talk About It in the Morning. That same month, Khalifa and Charlie Puth released the song "See You Again", a tribute to Paul Walker, who died during filming for Furious 7.
After releasing several "Weedmixes" on SoundCloud, including "Ziplocc" and "Maan!", Wiz took to Twitter to create hype about his new mixtape, 28 Grams, which was due to be released on May 25, 2014. However, Wiz was arrested in El Paso, Texas for marijuana possession the day before, and there were fears that the mixtape would be pushed back. After posting a "jail selfie" and hashtagging "FreeTrapWiz" on Twitter, he was released hours later, meaning the mixtape would go ahead with its intended release date.
On January 23, 2015, Khalifa was featured on a remix release of the Fall Out Boy song "Uma Thurman". On May 18, they performed the song together on the 2015 Billboard Music Awards show. In the summer of 2015, he began touring the United States with Fall Out Boy and Hoodie Allen in a tour titled "The Boys of Zummer Tour". The tour featured performances of "Uma Thurman" by Fall Out Boy and Khalifa. Later that year, on December 15, 2015, Wiz released the mixtape "Cabin Fever 3". During the Golden Globes on January 10, 2016, Wiz announced that his next album, titled Khalifa, would be released on the 22nd of that month. However, the album was released on February 5, 2016. On May 24, 2016, he released "Pull Up", a standalone single in promotion of his sixth album, Rolling Papers 2, which was released on July 13, 2018.
In 2016, Khalifa sued former manager Benjy Grinberg and Rostrum Records because of a "360 deal" that he signed which he claimed was unfair. Khalifa is seeking $1 million in compensation as well as punitive damages and attorney fees. He and Grinberg split after 10 years of partnership.In 2018, he wrote racist and offensive lyrics about Koreans in his song "Hot Now", sparking controversy.On April 20, 2020, Khalifa released a new EP, The Saga of Wiz Khalifa. The album included collaborations with Tyga, Logic, Mustard and Ty Dolla $ign.In May 2020, Khalifa featured on a new song, Drums Drums Drums with Travis Barker.In 2021, Khalifa competed in season five of The Masked Singer as "Chameleon". He finished in third place.


== Personal life ==
Khalifa began dating model Amber Rose in early 2011. They got engaged on March 1, 2012, and married on July 8, 2013. They have one son, Sebastian Taylor (born 2013). On September 24, 2014, it was announced that Rose would be filing for divorce, citing irreconcilable differences. As of 2015, Khalifa and Rose have joint custody of their son.Khalifa is open about his use of cannabis, and he has claimed in many interviews that he spends $10,000 a month on cannabis, and also smokes daily. As of early 2014, Khalifa no longer pays for cannabis and is sponsored by The Cookie Company, a medical marijuana dispensary which sells his "Khalifa Kush" (KK) strain, which he partnered with RiverRock Cannabis to create. Also, in 2016 Khalifa was featured in a cooking show with Martha Stewart and Snoop Dogg where weed was the main ingredient.
Khalifa began training in the martial art Brazilian jiu-jitsu in May 2017 with Rigan Machado, an 8th degree red and black belt. Shortly after, he began training in Muay Thai with former UFC bantamweight title contender Cat Zingano and at the Unbreakable Performance Center in Los Angeles. On April 24, 2018, Yokkao hosted a private Muay Thai seminar with Thai boxing legend Saenchai for Khalifa at Unbreakable.In April 2023, it was announced that Khalifa would be taking on his first BJJ match against an unconfirmed opponent under the High Rollerz ruleset.


== Honors ==
Pittsburgh City Council declared 12-12-12 (December 12, 2012) to be Wiz Khalifa Day in the city. Khalifa graduated from Pittsburgh's Taylor Allderdice High School and in January 2012, purchased a home in nearby Canonsburg, Pennsylvania.


== Discography ==

Show and Prove (2006)
Deal or No Deal (2009)
Rolling Papers (2011)
Mac & Devin Go to High School (with Snoop Dogg) (2011)
O.N.I.F.C. (2012)
Blacc Hollywood (2014)
Rolling Papers 2 (2018)
Multiverse (2022)


== Tours ==
Waken Baken Tour (2010)
Rolling Papers World Tour (2011)
Under the Influence of Music Tour (2011, 2012, 2014)
Under the Influence Tour (2013)
Boys of Zummer Tour (2015)
High Road Summer Tour  (with Snoop Dogg) (2016)
Dazed & Blazed Tour (2018)
Decent Exposure Tour (2019)
2009 Tour  (with Currensy) (2019)
Vinyl Verse Summer Tour  (with Logic) (2022)
High School Reunion Tour  (with Snoop Dogg) (2023)


== Filmography ==


== Awards and nominations ==


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website
Wiz Khalifa at MTV
Wiz Khalifa at IMDbJeryl Grant (born April 2, 1976), better known by his stage name Killa Sin, is considered the best-known member of Killarmy and is regarded as one of the most skilled Wu-Tang Clan affiliates.


== Biography ==
Killa Sin has appeared on gold and platinum selling albums from members of the Wu-Tang Clan, on movie soundtracks such as Soul in the Hole and ONYX's Shut 'Em Down.
Killa Sin has been in and out of prison for the better part of his career. He has been linked to several violent incidents within the hip-hop community, including one in which rapper Mase left with a broken jaw, and another in which associates of 50 Cent were robbed. He is notorious in certain circles for having gone after figures of high prestige and celebrity.He was working on his own solo album, but in 2015, he was convicted of criminal weapons possession and received a 16-years-to-life sentence. He is currently in jail at the Sing Sing Correctional Facility in Ossining, New York.Killa Sin is the brother of Oli "Power" Grant, the Wu executive. He is currently mentoring his young nephew Young Prince.


== Discography ==


== Videography ==


== References ==Kirlan Labarrie (born November 16, 1995), better known by his stage name Kirk Knight, is an American record producer, rapper and member of the hip hop collective Pro Era. His debut project, Late Knight Special, was released on October 30, 2015. On July 21, 2017, he released a collaborative project with fellow Pro Era member Nyck Caution, Nyck @ Knight, with its first single "Off the Wall" released on June 8, 2017. Kirk Knight is both a producer as well as a rapper. Kirk has produced top songs such as Flem by A$AP Ferg and Big Dusty by Joey Bada$$. His debut studio album, Late Night Special, peaked on the Billboard charts on November 21, 2015 at number 33. Lasting one week on the charts. Recently, Kirk Knight as well as Joey Bada$$ of the Pro Era collective rap group have made hints at a new solo album coming out in 2018 for Kirk Knight. Kirk Knight also went on tour in 2018 with rap collective Flatbush Zombies along with fellow Pro Era member Nyck Caution.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===


=== Production ===

The following is a list of albums in which Kirk Knight has produced as either producer or co-producer, showing year released, performing artists and album name.


== Filmography ==


== References ==
Notes
Citations


== External links ==

Official websiteJoshua Dai’Quan  Goods (born April 28, 1992), known professionally as Tate Kobang, is an American rapper, songwriter and record producer. Although active in the Baltimore hip-hop scene since 2011, he rose to prominence with "Bank Rolls (Remix)," a 90-second promotional single for his April 2015 release “Live Hazey,” released on YouTube on April 19, 2015, in remembrance of his mother. In 2020, he co-wrote the single "Mr. Right Now" by 21 Savage and Metro Boomin (featuring Drake).


== Early and personal life ==
Tate Kobang grew up in Northeast Baltimore, Maryland, before moving to York, Pennsylvania, as a teenager, where he attended Central York High School before dropping out to pursue rap. In 2013, his mother and father died suddenly within months of each other, making him responsible for his 8 younger siblings at age 21, prompting him to continue music at a more serious level to provide for his family.


== Influences ==
Although he originally wanted to be a video game programmer, Kobang’s interest in music stemmed at an early age—he sang in his church choir at age 5, and began writing music around age 11. He also learned to read music and play the saxophone and piano in middle school, and took music production classes in high school. Kobang’s uncle, Baltimore rapper Killa Q, introduced him to rap, and even had Kobang write for him. Kobang also credits artists Mr. Cheeks, Method Man, and Cassidy as influences.


== Career ==


=== Success of Bank Rolls (Remix) ===
In honor of his late mother’s birthday, a tribute that’s been done since 2013, Kobang released Bank Rolls (Remix) on April 19, 2015, as a promotional hit for his newest mixtape. Bank Rolls (Remix) was a featured song in Watch Dogs 2. The song uses Baltimore rapper Tim Trees' 2000 song “Bank Roll” and features a verse that remembers Baltimore DJ K-Swift, who died in 2008. That day is also the day of Freddie Gray's death after being in a coma from injury complications allegedly caused by the Baltimore Police Department. With heavy media attention and national focus on Baltimore at this time, Kobang released the song to bring a sense of happiness and pride to the city. Following the viral success of the 90-second video, Kobang went into the studio with the producer of the original track, Rod Lee, to extend the track into a full song.


=== Signing with 300 Entertainment ===
Shortly after its release, “Bank Rolls (Remix)” gained the attention of veteran industry leader Lyor Cohen’s and Baltimore native Kevin Liles’ 300 Entertainment. At first, Kobang was hesitant but considered the offer after researching the industry leading names behind the label. In July 2015, Kobang traveled to New York City to sign a record deal with 300 Entertainment. In January 2016, he appeared on the label's 13-city Young Hustle Tour which featured acts such as Rich The Kid, T-Wayne, TK N Cash, and Rejjie Snow.


=== Since We’re Here ===
Kobang released the Since We’re Here mixtape in April 2016, which consisted of freestyle and remixed songs. A video for “Poppin”, a single from the mixtape, was released on April 26, 2016. The video was filmed spontaneously at a Georgia Waffle House. On May 20, 2016, Kobang released a video for “Don’t Need”, which features artist Freeband TEST.


=== Silent Waves ===
Silent Waves, presented by DTLR and Under Armour. Kobang offers up 11 tracks on the mixtape which is hosted by DJ Flow with just one feature from fellow Baltimore artist Young Moose. Also hometown Producers such as GeniroBeatz, D Dae, YG! Beats and much more.


=== Tate Ko ===
On November 27, 2017, Kobang released his highly anticipated mixtape Tate Ko. The 15-track project was led by his hit single "North North" and included features from Swizz Beatz, Chaz French, Deetranada, Young Money Yawn and West Side Goldie. Production came from Swizz, YG! Beats, Millz Douglas, Reazy Renegade, Honorable C.N.O.T.E. and Kobang himself.


=== 28 ===
On April 28, 2018, Kobang Released Mixtape which showcased his Production team he formed to create his bouncy Sound Featuring YG!Beats, Millz Douglas and Genirobeatz. The mixtape features 7 tracks of all club bangers and features 1 Feat from Band Boy Skooda. This mixtape also is a celebration of him and his producer birthday YG!beats which is the meaning behind 28.


== Discography ==
Bank Rolls Remix - July 2015 (Single)
Oh My - February 2016 (Single)
Since We're Here - April 2016 (Mixtape)
Yeah Prod By GeniroBeatz - March 2017 (Single)
Silent Waves - March 2017 (Mixtape)
Tate Ko - November 2017 (Mixtape)
28 - April 2018 (EP)


== Notable mentions ==
Kobang's “Bank Rolls (Remix)” appears at #87 on Pitchfork’s list of the 100 Best Tracks of 2015, as well as on NPR Music's Favorite Songs of 2015 in the hip hop genre. Also featured in Watch Dogs 2 a game produced by Ubisoft. The song also made it to PigeonsandPlanes.com's Best Songs of 2015 at #66, as well as TheStashed.com's list of 25 Artists to Watch in 2016 at #22.


== References ==


== External links ==
Tate Kobang on Twitter 
Tate Kobang on InstagramNathaniel Thomas Wilson (born July 20, 1968), better known by his stage name Kool G Rap (or simply G Rap), is an American rapper. He began his career in the mid-1980s as one half of the group Kool G Rap & DJ Polo and as a member of the Juice Crew. He is widely considered to be one of the most influential and skilled MCs of all time, and a pioneer of mafioso rap/street/hardcore content and multisyllabic rhyming. On his album The Giancana Story, he stated that the "G" in his name stands for "Giancana" (after the mobster Sam Giancana), but on other occasions he has stated that it stands for "Genius".He has also been cited as a major influence on some of hip-hop's most critically acclaimed figures, such as The Notorious B.I.G.,
Nas, Eminem and Jay-Z, as well as many underground rappers.


== Biography ==


=== Early years ===
Wilson grew up in the poverty-ridden streets of Corona, Queens, New York City, with legendary producer Eric B. In an interview with The Source he stated;

Growing up in Corona was like a little Harlem, it wasn't that hard for a nigga to be influenced by the street life type of mentality. I was like 15 years old, Ma dukes couldn't dress a nigga no more and at that age you want a little money in your pocket. That's what gets us all, material possessions. A nigga got caught up in that mentality. Nigga started selling drugs at a certain point, and all that shit, it's what was goin' on in the streets ... eventually all my friends got smoked. Everybody was droppin'. All my friends started packing burners everyday, we was wild shorties.
Around this time, Wilson was looking for a DJ, and through Eric B., he met DJ Polo, who was looking for an MC to collaborate with.


=== Kool G Rap and DJ Polo ===
Juice Crew producer Mr. Magic and DJ Marley Marl allowed Polo and Kool G Rap to go to their studio to record a demo, which resulted in the song "It's a Demo." The song was written and recorded in one night, and had Marley so impressed, that he instantly embraced Kool G Rap and DJ Polo as Juice Crew members. In 1986, the duo appeared on Mr. Magic's Rap Attack radio show on 107.5. They eventually released "It's a Demo" as a single with "I'm Fly", along with two more singles. Shortly after this, Kool G Rap appeared on the Juice Crew's classic posse cut "The Symphony" before they released their debut album, Road to the Riches in 1989. This album and their two later albums, Wanted: Dead or Alive (1990) and Live and Let Die (1992), are highly regarded and considered hip-hop classics. Eventually, in 1993, Kool G Rap parted ways with DJ Polo to pursue a solo career.


=== Solo career ===
In 1995, Wilson started his solo career with the album 4, 5, 6, which featured production from Buckwild, and guest appearances from Nas, MF Grimm and B-1. It has been his most commercially successful record, reaching No. 24 on the US Billboard 200 album chart. This was followed by Roots of Evil in 1998. In 1997, G Rap was featured on Frankie Cutlass'  Politics & Bullshit album, on a track entitled "Know Da Game" which also featured Mobb Deep.
He then planned to release his next album, The Giancana Story, on Rawkus Records in 2000. Due to several complications with the record label, the album release date was pushed back several times, and the album was eventually released in 2002. "My Life", the single from the album, featuring Talk Box legend G-Wise, reached No. 6 on the US Billboard Hot 100 Rap singles charts. Kool G Rap and his group 5 Family Click then released a joint album, Click of Respect, on Kool G Rap's own Igloo Ent. record label in 2003, to mild success. There were rumors of Kool G Rap's signing to both Rocafella and G-Unit Records, and at one point Maybach Music Group. In 2007, he released Half a Klip on Chinga Chang Records, featuring production from, among others, DJ Premier and Marley Marl. A full LP was released in 2011, Riches, Royalty, Respect showcasing his true to form style and lyricism. The promise and prospects of collaboration albums were announced later the next year on his own, newly formed label FullMettle. The first of these new projects came in 2018 with the album  Son of G Rap with Rochester, New York based rapper 38 Spesh.
In later years, Kool G Rap's interests extended outside hip-hop. He stated in further interviews his desire to begin writing movie scripts, an ambition taken in for a few years as he sought out various collaborators, and as well as his desire to work on a clothing line at one point.


== Legacy ==
Kool G Rap is regarded as a hugely influential golden age rapper. Music journalist Peter Shapiro suggests that he "created the blueprint for Nas, Biggie and everyone who followed in their path". Kool G is described by Kool Moe Dee as "the progenitor and prototype for Biggie, Jay-Z, Treach, N.O.R.E., Fat Joe, Big Pun, and about twenty-five more hard-core emcees", and Kool Moe Dee also claims Kool G Rap is "the most lyrical" out of all of the artists mentioned. MTV describes Kool G Rap as a "hip-hop godfather", adding that he paved the way for a lot of MCs who we would not have heard of otherwise. Rolling Stone says, "G Rap excelled at the street narrative, a style that would come to define later Queens MCs like Nas (who was hugely influenced by G Rap on his early records) and Mobb Deep".Other artists who have named Kool G Rap as a major influence include The Notorious B.I.G., Eminem, Jay-Z, Tajai of Souls of Mischief, Vinnie Paz of Jedi Mind Tricks, Steele of Smif-N-Wessun, Havoc of Mobb Deep, Rock of Heltah Skeltah, MC Serch, Termanology, Black Thought of The Roots, M.O.P., R.A. the Rugged Man, Bun B of UGK, Rah Digga; RZA, Ghostface Killah, and Raekwon of Wu-Tang Clan; The Lady of Rage, Big Pun, O.C. of D.I.T.C., Memphis Bleek, Kurupt, Pharoahe Monch of Organized Konfusion, Action Bronson, and Twista, among others.
He is also often very highly rated in terms of his technical ability and is often ranked alongside other highly regarded golden age MCs, such as Big Daddy Kane, Rakim, and KRS-One. In Jay-Z's track 'Encore', Jay-Z raps, "hearing me rap is like hearing G Rap in his prime". Allmusic calls him "one of the greatest rappers ever", "a master", and "a legend".A number of rappers, such as Ice Cube, Rakim, Big Daddy Kane, Lloyd Banks, and Nas have put him in their lists of favorite rappers. Kool Moe Dee ranked Kool G Rap at No. 14 in his book There's A God on the Mic: The True 50 Greatest MCs, and MTV gives him an 'Honorable Mention' in their Greatest MCs of All Time list.


=== Rhyme technique ===
Kool G Rap is known for using complex multisyllabic rhymes since his debut, and this remains a hallmark of his style, along with his rapid-fire delivery and "superhuman breath control". He is known for rapping with as many multisyllabic rhymes as possible, sometimes all in the same rhyme scheme for a whole verse, such as on Sway & King Tech's "The Anthem".He has also been cited as one of hip-hop's greatest storytellers, alongside Slick Rick and Notorious B.I.G., with "laser-like visual descriptions", and "vivid narratives". Rolling Stone states that, "Live and Let Die continued G Rap's reign as rap music's premier yarn-spinner".Kool G Rap provided the foreword for the 2009 book How to Rap: The Art & Science of the Hip-Hop MC, also providing insight into his rhyming technique.


=== Mafioso rap ===
Kool G Rap is often credited as the first rapper to infuse his lyrics with mafioso and hardcore street content.
This can be seen as early as 1989 in the song "Road to the Riches" where he makes a reference to Al Pacino (who played Michael Corleone in The Godfather	and mobster Tony Montana in the 1983 crime drama movie Scarface) – this was long before albums such as Raekwon's Only Built 4 Cuban Linx… (1995), and Jay-Z's Reasonable Doubt (1996) made such references popular.Since his debut, he has used various references to mob movies in his lyrics, album covers, and titles. For example, the first line of 'Bad to the Bone' from Wanted: Dead or Alive (1990) is, I'm bad to the bone / with a style like Al Capone, the album Live and Let Die (1992) uses samples from the 1987 crime film The Untouchables, the album cover of Roots of Evil (1998) uses elements from The Godfather and Scarface theatrical posters, and The Giancana Story (2002) album title references Mafia boss Sam Giancana.Rolling Stone says, "before Kool G Rap, New York didn't really have the street rap that could hold its own against what artists such as L.A.'s Ice-T and N.W.A were churning out" and that "G Rap excelled at the street narrative".His take on crime, violence, and the mafioso lifestyle ranges from remorse and contemplation (e.g. 'Streets of New York', described by Rolling Stone as "a vivid look inside the misery of the hood"), to glorification (e.g. 'Fast Life' featuring Nas).


== Personal life ==
Wilson dated Karrine Steffans from 1995 to 1999 and they have one son together.


== Discography ==

Solo albums4,5,6 (1995)
Roots of Evil (1998)
The Giancana Story (2002)
Half a Klip (2008)
Riches, Royalty, Respect (2011)
Return of the Don (2017)
Last of a Dying Breed (2022)Collaboration albumsRoad to the Riches (with DJ Polo) (1989)
Wanted: Dead or Alive (with DJ Polo) (1990)
Live and Let Die (with DJ Polo) (1992)
Rated XXX (with DJ Polo) (1996)
Click of Respect (with The 5 Family Click) (2003)
Once Upon a Crime (with Necro as The Godfathers) (2013)
Son of G Rap (with 38 Spesh) (2018)


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Paul Edwards, foreword by Kool G Rap, 2009, How to Rap: The Art & Science of the Hip-Hop MC. Chicago Review Press.
Kool Moe Dee, 2003, There's a God on the Mic: The True 50 Greatest MCs, Thunder's Mouth Press.
Brian Coleman, 2007, Check the Technique: Liner Notes For Hip-Hop Junkies, Villard, Random House.
Peter Shapiro, 2005, The Rough Guide to Hip-Hop, 2nd Edition, Penguin.
William Jelani Cobb, 2007, To the Break of Dawn: A Freestyle on the Hip Hop Aesthetic, NYU Press.
Mickey Hess, 2007, Icons Of Hip Hop, Greenwood Publishing Group.


== External links ==

Kool G Rap at AllMusicMohandas Dewese (born August 8, 1962), better known by his stage name Kool Moe Dee, is an American rapper, songwriter and actor. Considered one of the forerunners of the new jack swing sound in hip hop, he gained fame in the 1980s as a member of one of the pioneering groups in hip hop music, the Treacherous Three, and for his later solo career. During his career he released a total of seven studio albums (five of them solo), with 1994's Interlude being the last to date.
His fast and aggressive rap style influenced following rap figures such as Big Daddy Kane, Beastie Boys, KRS-One, Rakim, Will Smith, N.W.A, Tupac Shakur, Nas, Jay-Z, among others. Among his most famous songs are "Go See the Doctor", "Wild Wild West" and "How Ya Like Me Now".Kool Moe Dee was ranked No. 33 on About.com's list of the 50 Greatest MCs of Our Time (1987–2007).


== Early life and education ==
Born Mohandas Dewese in Harlem, Kool Moe Dee attended the State University of New York at Old Westbury, where he received a degree in communications in 1985.


== Career ==
One of Kool Moe Dee's first feats was being part of the first major rap battle in history. He lyrically attacked Busy Bee after one of his performances in 1981. He was extremely mad at Busy Bee, for talking smack about other MC's, claiming that none of them could beat him in a contest. Moe Dee used some of his rhymes from "The New Rap Language" and "Whip It". He also used a little bit of Busy Bee's style during the battle. In 1985, the Treacherous Three disbanded. In 1986, he went solo, releasing a self-titled album that ranked 83 on Billboard. After meeting a young up and coming artist at Sugar Hill records by the name of Lavaba Mallison, who would later become his manager, Kool Moe Dee left Sugar Hill records to join Lavaba Mallison, Robert "Gusto" Wells, Greg Marius and up and coming producer Teddy Riley at the newly founded ROOFTOP records. He co-operated with the young producers Teddy Riley and Lavaba Mallison which contributed to the new jack swing movement that would gain popularity in the years to follow.
Kool Moe Dee released his second album, How Ya Like Me Now which was his most successful album commercially, achieving platinum status. He then went on to release his third album, Knowledge Is King in 1989, which went gold. In 1990, he performed on Quincy Jones' album Back on the Block along with fellow rappers Melle Mel, Big Daddy Kane and Ice-T. The album gained considerable critical and financial success and won the 1991 Grammy Award for Album of the Year. In 1991, the release of his album Funke, Funke Wisdom signaled Kool Moe Dee's decline. Moe Dee himself has stated that this was his worst album. He induced his release from Jive Records in 1992. After a two-year lay off, he released his greatest hits album which regained some of his former success and acclaim. In 1994, his album Interlude was released and failed to gain Moe Dee much of his former success of the mid-1980s. In 1993, he re-united with his fellow ex members of the Treacherous Three to release the album Old School Flava on Ichiban. His last commercial release was the single "Love Love/What You Wanna Do" which was released on Spoiled Brat Entertainment Inc. Moe Dee appeared in the MTV box office bomb Crossroads as a bartender.


=== Feud with LL Cool J ===
Kool Moe Dee conducted a long-running rivalry with fellow New York rapper LL Cool J. Along with other rappers such as MC Shan, Kool Moe Dee claimed that LL had stolen their rap styles. He also felt that LL was disrespecting rap pioneers such as Melle Mel and Grandmaster Caz by proclaiming that he was "rap's new grandmaster" without paying due respect to those who came before him. He challenged LL on his platinum selling album How Ya Like Me Now on the single of the same name. He also took a shot at LL by appearing on the album cover with a jeep in the background with the wheel crushing one of LL's trademark red Kangol hats.


=== Behind The Rhyme talk show ===
In 2017 he launched as executive producer and host of Behind The Rhyme, a digital talk show series featuring an interview with a hip-hop legend or current star.  The premiere episode was released in June 2020, featuring Chuck D, front man of Public Enemy and supergroup Prophets of Rage.  The show is executive produced by industry veterans Ann Carli and Devin DeHaven, who also directs the series.


== Discography ==

Kool Moe Dee (1986)
How Ya Like Me Now (1987)
Knowledge Is King (1989)
Funke, Funke Wisdom (1991)
Interlude (1994)


== Awards and nominations ==
Grammy Awards


== Appeared on ==
The Isley Brothers "Come Together" on the album Spend the Night (Warner Bros – 1988)
Quincy Jones w/ Melle Mel & Big Daddy Kane & Ice-T "Back On the Block" from the album Back on the Block (Qwest Records – 1989)
Quincy Jones w/ Ice T, Big Daddy Kane "Jazz Corner of the World" from the album Back on the Block (Qwest Records – 1989)
Stop the Violence Movement "Self Destruction" (Jive/ RCA Records – 1989)
HEAL w/ various artists Civilization Vs. Technology (Elektra – 1991)
Zebrahead "Good Time" from the album Zebrahead Soundtrack (Ruffhouse – 1992)
CB4 w/ Daddy-O & Hi-C "Rapper's Delight" CB4 Soundtrack (MCA – 1993)
Regina Belle "Tango In Paris" from the album Passion (Columbia – 1993)
Babydol "I Want You Back" (Miracle – 1993)
Animaniacs Hip-Opera Christmas (Rhino – 1997)
The Spinners "I'll Be Around" from the album At Their Best (Intersound – 1999)
"I Go To Work" from the album Bad Boy Bill's Vocal Mix" (Jive – 1999)
Will Smith w/ Dru Hill "Wild Wild West" from the album Willenium (Columbia – 1999)
Pablo "Next Level" (Howlin – 2003)
Pat Boone "Backbone" from the album R&B Duet Hits (Goldenlane Records – 2006)
Nas w/ various artists "Where Are They Now (80's Remix)" (Ill Will Records – 2007)
Ice-T "Darc Fight Club" EP also features "Revolution" 2009
Macklemore & Ryan Lewis "Downtown" with Eric Nally, Melle Mel, and Grandmaster Caz – 2015


== References ==


== External links ==
Behind The Rhyme TV
Kool Moe Dee at IMDb
Lyrics transcriptions from OHHLA.com
"Kool Moe Dee (aka: Dr Media) Leads Industry Therapy", NYU Stern videoLawrence "Kris" Parker (born August 20, 1965), better known by his stage names KRS-One (; an abbreviation of "Knowledge Reigns Supreme Over Nearly Everyone") and Teacha, is an American rapper from the South Bronx. He rose to prominence as part of the hip hop group Boogie Down Productions, which he formed with DJ Scott La Rock in the mid-1980s. KRS-One is known for his songs "Sound of da Police", "Love's Gonna Get'cha (Material Love)", and "My Philosophy". Boogie Down Productions received numerous awards and critical acclaim in their early years. Following the release of the group's debut album, Criminal Minded, fellow artist Scott La Rock was shot and killed, but KRS-One continued the group, effectively as a solo project. He began releasing records under his own name in 1993. He is politically active, having started the Stop the Violence Movement after La Rock's death. He is also a vegan activist, expressed in songs such as "Beef". He is widely considered an influence on many hip-hop artists.


== Biography ==


=== Early life ===
Lawrence Parker was born in the New York City borough of Brooklyn in 1965 to an American mother. His biological father, who was not involved in his upbringing, was from the Caribbean island of Barbados. He had a troubled childhood, suffering severe beatings from his American stepfather John Parker when the family lived in Harlem, New York. When his mother left the marriage both he and his younger brother Kenny moved with her to the Bronx, before again moving a year later to Brooklyn. Home life continued to be difficult, including further physical abuse at the hands of his mother's new Jamaican partner,  and he ran away from home several times.At age 16 he left home permanently, and spent a time living homeless in New York, before eventually signing himself into a group home in the Bronx.


=== Hip hop ===
Growing up, Parker had developed a deep love of the emerging hip hop culture in New York, and by that time he was honing his craft as an MC, as well as being an active graffiti writer. Some time after leaving the group home he moved into a homeless shelter in the South Bronx where he was dubbed "Krishna" by the residents due to his curiosity about the Hare Krishna spirituality of some of the anti-poverty workers. During his stay at the community shelter he encountered youth counsellor Scott Sterling a.k.a. DJ Scott La Rock and there began a DJ-MC relationship. He also engaged in the street art activity graffiti under the alias KRS-One (Knowledge Reigns Supreme Over Nearly Everyone). Together he and Sterling created Boogie Down Productions, releasing their debut album, Criminal Minded, in 1987.


=== Boogie Down Productions ===

KRS-One began his recording career as one third of the hip hop group Boogie Down Productions, or BDP, alongside DJ Scott La Rock and Derrick "D-Nice" Jones. Additionally, KRS-One had taken offense to "The Bridge", a song by Marley Marl's protege, MC Shan (KRS-One later reconciled with Marley Marl, producing an album with him in 2007 titled Hip Hop Lives). The song could be interpreted as a claim that Queensbridge was the monument of hip-hop, though MC Shan has repeatedly denied this claim. Still, KRS-One "dissed" the song with the BDP record "South Bronx". A second round of volleys ensued with Shan's "Kill That Noise" and BDP's "The Bridge Is Over". KRS-One, demonstrating his nickname "The Blastmaster", gave a live performance against MC Shan, and many conceded he had won the battle. Many believe this live performance to be the first MC battle where rappers attack each other, instead of a battle between who can get the crowd more hyped.Parker and Sterling decided to form a rap group together, initially calling themselves "Scott La Rock and the Celebrity Three". That was short-lived, however, as the two peripheral members quit, leaving Parker (now calling himself KRS-One) and Sterling. They then decided to call themselves "Boogie Down Productions". "Success is the Word", a 12-inch single produced by David Kenneth Eng and Kenny Beck, was released on indie Fresh/Sleeping Bag Records (under the group name "12:41") but did not enjoy commercial success.
Boogie Down Productions released their debut album Criminal Minded in 1987. Scott La Rock was killed in a shooting later that year, after attempting to mediate a dispute between teenager and BDP member D-Nice and local hoodlums.
During this time KRS-One also gained acclaim as one of the first MCs to incorporate Jamaican style into hip-hop, using the Zung gu zung melody, originally made famous by Yellowman in Jamaican dance halls earlier in the decade. This is particularly evident in the song titled "Remix for P is Free".  Dancehall influence is also very prominent in the BDP hit "The Bridge is Over", which uses the same melody as Super Cat's 1986 dancehall hit "Boops", and lyrical inflections in a Jamaican style.  KRS-One is credited as one of the more influential figures to bridge the gap between Jamaican music and American hip-hop.
Following the fatal shooting of Scott La Rock in 1987, KRS was determined to continue Boogie Down Productions through the tragedy, releasing the album By All Means Necessary in 1988. He was joined by beatboxer D-Nice, rapper Ramona "Ms. Melodie" Parker (whose marriage to Kris would last from 1988 to 1992), and Kris's younger brother DJ Kenny Parker, among others. However, Boogie Down Productions would remain KRS' show, and the group's content would become increasingly political through the subsequent releases Ghetto Music: The Blueprint of Hip Hop, Edutainment, Live Hardcore Worldwide and Sex and Violence.
KRS-One was the primary initiator behind the H.E.A.L. compilation and the Stop the Violence Movement; for the latter he would attract many prominent emcees to appear on the 12-inch single "Self Destruction". As KRS adopted this "humanist", less defensive approach, he turned away from his "Blastmaster" persona and towards that of "The Teacha", although he has constantly used "Blastmaster" throughout his career.


=== Solo career ===
After five largely solo albums under the name "Boogie Down Productions", KRS-One decided to set out on his own. On his first solo album, 1993's Return of the Boom Bap, he worked together with producers DJ Premier, Kid Capri and Showbiz, the latter providing the track "Sound of da Police". His second album, 1995's KRS-One, featured Channel Live on "Free Mumia", a song in which they criticize Civil Rights activist C. Delores Tucker among others. Other prominent guest stars on KRS-One included Mad Lion, Busta Rhymes, Das EFX and Fat Joe.
In 1991, KRS-One appeared on the alternative rock group R.E.M.'s single "Radio Song", which appeared on the band's album Out of Time, released the same year.In 1992, Bradley Nowell from Sublime featured an acoustic song named "KRS-One" with his voice and DJ's samples.
In 1995, KRS organized a group called Channel Live, whose album Station Identification he produced most of, along with Rheji Burrell and Salaam Remi.
In 1997, KRS surprised many with his release of the album I Got Next. The album's lead single, "Step into a World (Rapture's Delight)", containing an interpolation of punk and new wave group Blondie, was accompanied by a remix featuring commercial rap icon Puff Daddy; another track was essentially a rock song. While the record would be his best-selling solo album (reaching #3 on the Billboard 200), such collaborations with notably mainstream artists and prominent, easily recognizable samples took many fans and observers of the vehemently anti-mainstream KRS-One by surprise.
In August 1997, in an appearance on Tim Westwood's BBC Radio 1, KRS-One criticized the station for not playing underground hip hop while also crediting Westwood for his promotion of hip hop over time. KRS-One said that Jive Records and Radio 1 did not support him, but finished by saluting Westwood with "you know you're my man".
In 1999, there were tentative plans to release Maximum Strength; a lead single, "5 Boroughs", was released on The Corruptor soundtrack. However, KRS apparently decided to abort the album's planned release, just as he had secured a position as a Vice-President of A&R at Reprise Records. The shelved album was again scheduled to be released in 2008, but ultimately an unrelated album entitled Maximum Strength 2008 was released in its place. He moved to southern California, and stayed there for two years, ending his relationship with Jive Records with A Retrospective in 2000.
In 2000, KRS-One and DJ Tomekk made a video for their single Return of Hip-Hop with German rappers Torch and MC Rene, in which hip-hop was revived by hospital staff. The song stayed in the German charts for nine weeks.
KRS resigned from his A&R position at Reprise in 2001, and returned to recording with a string of albums, beginning with 2001's The Sneak Attack on Koch Records. In 2002, he released a gospel-rap album, Spiritual Minded, surprising many longtime fans; he had once denounced Christianity as a "slavemaster religion" which African-Americans should not follow. During this period, KRS founded the Temple of Hiphop, an organization to preserve and promote "Hiphop Kulture". Subsequent releases included 2003's Kristyles and D.I.G.I.T.A.L., 2004's Keep Right, and 2006's Life.
The only latter-day KRS-One album to gain any significant attention has been Hip-Hop Lives, his 2007 collaboration with fellow hip hop veteran Marley Marl, partly attributed to the Bridge Wars between the pair, but also the title's apparent response to Nas' 2006 release Hip-Hop Is Dead. While many critics have commented they would have been more excited had this collaboration occurred twenty years earlier, the album was met with positive reviews.
KRS-One has collaborated with other artists including Canadian rap group Hellafactz, Jay-Roc N' Jakebeatz and New York producer Domingo. He and Domingo publicly squashed their beef, which started over financial issues, and released a digital single on iTunes on November 25. The single, titled "Radio", also featured Utah up and comer Eneeone and is dedicated to underground MCs that don't get the radio airplay they deserve. In 2009 KRS-One guest-starred on several albums, including Arts & Entertainment on the song "Pass the Mic" by fellow hip hop veterans Masta Ace and Ed O.G. KRS-One also featured on the posse cut "Mega Fresh X" by Cormega (alongside DJ Red Alert, Parrish Smith, Grand Puba, and Big Daddy Kane) on his album Born and Raised.
KRS-One and Buckshot announced that they would be collaborating on an album set to be released in 2009. The first single, "ROBOT", was released on May 5, 2009. The music video was directed by Todd Angkasuwan and debuted as the New Joint of the Day on 106 & Park on September 4, 2009. The album itself, called Survival Skills, leaked on the Internet on September 9, 2009, and the album was officially released on September 15, 2009. It debuted at #62, making it onto the Billboard 200. It sold around 8,500 copies its first week and was met with generally positive reviews. Steve Juon of RapReviews.com gave the album a flawless 10 out of 10, claiming, "Buckshot and KRS have achieved something rather remarkable here – an album I can't find a single fault with. There's not a bad beat, there's not a whack rhyme, there's not a collaborator on a track that missed the mark, and the disc itself is neither too short nor too long."In 2010 KRS-One was honored, along with Buckshot, by artists Ruste Juxx, Torae & Skyzoo, Sha Stimuli, Promise, J.A.M.E.S. Watts and Team Facelift, on their mixtape Survival Kit, an ode to the 2009 album Survival Skills. The mixtape was released for free download on DuckDown.com. The album features new version of KRS classics "South Bronx", "Sound of da Police" and "MC's Act Like They Don't Know", as well as new versions of well-known Buckshot songs and "Past Present Future" from the Survival Skills album. The MC Fashawn said in his verse on MC's Act Like They Don't Know, "I did it to make Kris smile / I figured he'd appreciate it".KRS-One was featured as the voice of Chris Cringle in Nike's Most Valuable Puppets commercials. KRS-One performed in May 2010 at SUNY New Paltz at their annual "Rock Against Racism" concert. He narrated the 2011 film Rhyme and Punishment, a documentary about hip-hop artists who have done jail time. The same year, KRS-One was featured in the title song for the film You Got Served: Beat the World. The song is entitled "Hip Hop Nation", and features K'naan and Lina. It was produced for the film by Frank Fitzpatrick.In 2012, KRS-One toured Australia for the first time. He travelled there by cruise ship, as he hates flying.In December 2020, KRS-One released his 23rd solo album Between Da Protests.


=== Stop the Violence Movement ===
The Stop the Violence Movement was formed by KRS-One in 1988/1989 in response to violence in the hip hop and black communities.
During a concert by Boogie Down Productions and Public Enemy, a young fan was killed in a fight. Coming soon after the shooting death of his friend and fellow BDP member Scott La Rock, KRS-One was galvanized into action and formed the Stop the Violence Movement. Composed of some of the biggest stars in contemporary East Coast hip hop, the movement released a single, "Self Destruction", in 1989, with all proceeds going to the National Urban League. A music video was created, and a VHS cassette entitled Overcoming Self-Destruction – The Making of the Self-Destruction Video was also released.
"Self-Destruction" was produced by KRS-One and D-Nice of Boogie Down Productions (Hank Shocklee of the Bomb Squad is credited as an associate producer).


=== Temple of Hip Hop ===
The Temple of Hip Hop is a ministry, archive, school, and society (M.A.S.S.) founded by KRS-One. Its goal is to maintain and promote Hip Hop Kulture.
The Temple of Hip Hop maintains that hip hop is a genuine political movement, religion, and culture. It calls on all fans to celebrate Hip Hop Appreciation Week on the third week of May each year. It encourages DJs and MCs to teach people about the culture of hip hop and to write more socially conscious songs, and radio stations to play more socially conscious hip hop.
Hip Hop History Month (November), founded by the Universal Zulu Nation, is also recognized.


=== Gospel of Hip Hop comments ===
In an interview with AllHipHop about his book The Gospel of Hip Hop, KRS-One said:

I'm suggesting that in 100 years, this book will be a new religion on the earth ... I think I have the authority to approach God directly, I don't have to go through any religion [or] train of thought. I can approach God directly myself and so I wrote a book called The Gospel of Hip Hop to free from all this nonsense garbage right now. I respect the Christianity, the Islam, the Judaism but their time is up.
 ... In a hundred years, everything that I'm saying to you will be common knowledge and people will be like, 'Why did he have to explain this? Wasn't it obvious?'
These comments have been referred to by numerous media outlets such as The A.V. Club, which commented that "KRS-One writes 600-page hip-hop bible; blueprint for rap religion", and "KRS-One has never been afraid to court controversy and provoke strong reactions. Now the Boogie Down Productions legend has topped himself by writing The Gospel of Hip Hop: The First Instrument, a mammoth treatise on the spirituality of hip-hop he hopes will some day become a sacred text of a new hip-hop religion".


== Personal life ==
KRS-One is a vocal supporter of veganism.He supported Ron Paul for president during his 2012 run.KRS-One's step-son (Randy Parker) was found dead in his Atlanta, Georgia, apartment on July 6, 2007. The Medical Examiner's office stated that Parker had died of a gunshot wound to the head, and listed the cause of death as suicide.His son Kris Parker (born 1992) is an aspiring music producer and DJ known as Predator Prime.


== Controversies ==


=== September 11 comments ===
In 2004, KRS said during a panel discussion hosted by The New Yorker magazine that "we cheered when 9/11 happened". His comment was criticized by many sources, including the New York Daily News, which called him an "anarchist" and said that "If Osama bin Laden ever buys a rap album, he'll probably start with a CD by KRS-One."
KRS responded with an editorial written for AllHipHop.com, stating:

I was asked about why hiphop has not engaged the current situation more (meaning 9/11), my response was "because it does not affect us, or at least we don't perceive that it affects us, 9/11 happened to them". I went on to say that "I am speaking for the culture now; I am not speaking my personal opinion." I continued to say; "9/11 affected them down the block; the rich, the powerful those that are oppressing us as a culture. Sony, RCA or BMG, Universal, the radio stations, Clear Channel, Viacom with BET and MTV, those are our oppressors, those are the people that we're trying to overcome in hiphop everyday, this is a daily thing. We cheered when 9/11 happened in New York and say that proudly here. Because when they were down at the trade center we were getting hit over the head by cops, told that we can't come in this building, hustled down to the train station because of the way we dressed and talked, and so on, we were racially profiled. So, when the planes hit the building we were like, "mmmm, justice." And just as I began to say "now of course a lot of our friends and family were lost there as well" I was interrupted ...
In late 2005, KRS was featured alongside Public Enemy's Chuck D on the remix of the song "Bin Laden" by Immortal Technique and DJ Green Lantern, which blames American neo-conservatives, the Reagan Doctrine, and U.S. President George W. Bush for the World Trade Center attacks, and indicates a parallel to the devaluation, destruction, and violence of urban housing project communities.
On April 29, 2007, KRS-One again defended his statements on the September 11 attacks when asked about them during an appearance on Hannity's America on the Fox News network. He stated that he meant that people cheered that the establishment had taken a hit, not that people were dying or had died. He also discussed, among other things, the Don Imus scandal and the use of profanity in hip-hop.


== Awards ==
VH1

2004, VH1 Hip Hop HonorsBET Hip Hop Awards

2007, I am Hip Hop
2007, Lifetime AchievementUrban Music Awards

2009, Living Legend Award
Bronx Walk of Fame (2001)


== Discography ==


== Filmography ==


== Publications ==


== See also ==


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Parmar, Priya (2009). Knowledge Reigns Supreme: The Critical Pedagogy of Hip-Hop Artist KRS-One. Sense Publishers. ISBN 978-9-0778-7450-9.
Parker, Kenny; Daniels, Rose (2022). My Brother's Name Is Kenny: The Greatest True Hip-Hop Story Ever Told. Kenny Parker Books. ISBN 978-1-7362-7563-4.


== External links ==

Official website
KRS-One at IMDb
KRS-One at AllMusic
KRS-One discography at DiscogsTalib Kweli Greene (; born October 3, 1975) is an American rapper. He earned recognition through his collaboration with fellow Brooklyn rapper Mos Def in 1997, when they formed the group Black Star. Kweli's musical career continued with solo success including collaborations with producers and rappers Kanye West, Just Blaze, and Pharrell Williams. His most recent album, Gotham, was released in 2020. In 2011, Kweli founded his own record label, Javotti Media.


== Early life ==
Born in Brooklyn, New York City, New York, Kweli grew up in a household in Brooklyn's Park Slope. His mother, Brenda Greene, is an English professor at Medgar Evers College of the City University of New York, and his father is an administrator at Adelphi University. His younger brother, Jamal Greene, is a professor of constitutional law at Columbia Law School and a graduate of Harvard University and Yale Law School, and former clerk to Justice John Paul Stevens on the Supreme Court.As a youth, Kweli was drawn to Afrocentric rappers, such as De La Soul and other members of the Native Tongues Posse whom he had met in high school. Kweli was a student at Cheshire Academy, a boarding school in Connecticut. He was previously a student at Brooklyn Technical High School. He later studied experimental theater at New York University.


== Music career ==


=== Early career (1997–2001) ===
Kweli made his debut in 1997, with featured five appearances on Doom, an album by Cincinnati, Ohio, group Mood. In Cincinnati, Kweli met Hi-Tek and the two collaborated on a few underground recordings as Reflection Eternal, including "Fortified Live" (1997), and "B-Boy Document 99/Chaos" (1999, featuring The High & Mighty).


=== Rawkus Records collaborative projects (1998–2000) ===
Shortly afterwards, upon returning to New York, he reconnected with Mos Def and formed Black Star. Kweli brought along Hi-Tek to produce 1998's Mos Def & Talib Kweli Are Black Star. The album, released amidst a late '90s renaissance of conscious, Afrocentric hip hop, was hailed by critics and achieved modest mainstream success. Kweli and Hi-Tek continued their Reflection Eternal partnership on the 2000 album Train of Thought. The album was recorded at Electric Lady Studios.


=== Hip Hop For Respect (2000) ===
An EP, Hip Hop for Respect, was organized by Mos Def and Kweli to speak out against police brutality, specifically, the case of Amadou Diallo. The project released one EP for Rawkus Entertainment. On February 4, 1999, Amadou Diallo was shot 41 times by four police officers while reaching into his pocket for his wallet. Diallo was unarmed. The project aimed to assemble 41 emcees to represent the 41 shots fired. Rappers featured on the EP include Owen Brown, Evil Dee, Kool G. Rap, Rah Digga, Sporty Thievz, Shabaam Sahdeeq, Common, Pharoahe Monch, Posdnuos, Donte and Main Flow of Mood, Nine, Tiye Phoenix, Breezly Brewn' of the Juggaknots, Punchline, Imani Uzuri, El-P and Mr. Len of Company Flow, Jah-Born of Medina Green, John Forté, Mr. Khaliyl, Fre, J-Live, Rubix, Invincible, Wordsworth, A.L., Kofi Taha, Tame One, Jane Doe, Grafh, Shyheim, Channel Live, Wise Intelligent, Cappadonna, Crunch Lo, Rock, Nonchalant, Ras Kass, Dead Prez and Parrish Smith. Producers included Mr. Khaliyl, Organized Noize, and 88-Keys.


=== Red Hot Organization (2001) ===
In 2001, Kweli and Mos Def, contributed to the Red Hot + Indigo compilation album created by the Red Hot Organization. The compilation was a tribute to Duke Ellington, that raised money for various charities devoted to increasing AIDS awareness and fighting the disease. Black Star collaborated with fellow artists John Patton and Ron Carter to record "Money Jungle". In 2002, Kweli contributed to the critically acclaimed Red Hot + Riot, a compilation CD created by the Red Hot Organization in tribute to the music and work of Nigerian musician Fela Kuti. He collaborated with fellow hip hop artists Dead Prez, Jorge Ben, and Bilal to remake the Fela Kuti song "Shuffering and Shmiling", for the album.


=== Rawkus Records solo albums (2001–2006) ===
In 2002, Kweli released his first solo album, Quality which featured production from a variety of producers, including DJ Quik and Kanye West.  The album was met with widespread critical acclaim and received some mainstream attention thanks to the West-produced single "Get By" which peaked at No. 77 on the Billboard Hot 100. Quality peaked at No. 21 on the US Billboard 200 and at No. 6 on the R&B/Hip-Hop Albums Chart.
In February 2004, Kweli featured on Kanye West's "Get 'Em High" off of West's debut album The College Dropout.
Kweli made a total of three appearances on Chappelle's Show. He was the second musical guest on the show, which aired on January 29, 2003.  For his second appearance, Kweli partnered with Yasiin Bey, as Black Star, for the finale of the show's first season on April 9, 2003. His third and final appearance on the show aired one year later on April 7, 2004.
In the summer of 2004, Kweli, along with Bob Moore's Amazing Mongrels, supported the Beastie Boys on their "Challah at Your Boy World Tour". That same summer, appeared on a Dilated Peoples song called "Live on Stage". A live remix was later featured on the video game NBA Street Vol. 2.
In the summer of 2004, Kweli also performed at Dave Chappelle's Block Party, both as a solo act and as one half of Black Star, and he was later featured in the film and soundtrack.
In November 2004, he released his second solo album and final Rawkus release, The Beautiful Struggle, which debuted at No. 14 on the Billboard 200. Kweli responded to Jay-Z's 2003 song "Moment of Clarity" in which Jay-Z rapped: "If skills sold, truth be told/I'd probably be, lyrically, Talib Kweli", in his own track, "Ghetto Show" featuring Common and Anthony Hamilton by stating "If lyrics sold then truth be told/I'd probably be just as rich and famous as Jay-Z." The album featured much more commercial production, including efforts from The Neptunes, Kanye West and Just Blaze.In 2005, Kweli had appeared in an episode of Trippin', a 2005 MTV environmental documentary television series hosted by Cameron Diaz, also featuring Justin Timberlake, and Jimmy Fallon. On the show, said celebrities visit various ecological locales around the world, in particular underprivileged areas of the world. The four of them traveled to Tanzania to visit one of the world's largest and most thriving ecosystems left on the planet, the Serengeti Plain. There, they had gone into the depths of the Serengeti Plain with a few local zoologists at the time.


=== BlackSmith Records (2005–2009) ===
In 2005, Kweli released a mixtape-CD with his newly formed Blacksmith Records called Right About Now: The Official Sucka Free Mix CD, a title which is considered a response to the criticism of The Beautiful Struggle. Some people regard Right About Now as an album because of its availability through commercial sites and its release of two singles. Right About Now also lacks the DJ overlays often accompanied by mixtapes which makes the CD feel more like an album. The album sold 16,000 copies in its first week of release, debuting at No. 113 on the Billboard 200. Sparking some controversy, on Right About Now Kweli sampled Ben Kweller's "In Other Words" for his own song "Ms. Hill". In part seven of Kweller's video podcast series "One Minute Pop Song", Kweller said he found Kweli's use of the song "a little fucked up" due to the fact that it was sampled without permission. In a similar incident, Kweli reacted with outrage on Twitter when a verse from "Fly Away" was sampled in Peter Andre's track of the same name. Kweli stated, "I protect the integrity of my music like a grizzly protects cubs. Woe to those who actively stand in the way of that." Kweli has not publicly addressed his unauthorized use of Kweller's "In Other Words".
In 2006, Kweli signed a distribution deal with Warner Bros. Records for Blacksmith Records. Warner Brothers launched an online community via Second Life for Kweli. In January, Kweli was featured in a commercial for the NCAA's Big Ten Conference, rapping about the league's basketball teams. In February 2006, Kweli provided the voice of the protagonist in the graffiti-themed video game Marc Eckō's Getting Up: Contents Under Pressure. In October 2006, Kweli performed on MTV's Wild 'N Out, hosted by Nick Cannon.On December 31, 2006, Kweli released nine songs he recorded with underground producer Madlib for free download in conjunction with the web site for Stones Throw Records, the label to which Madlib is signed. The album was entitled  Liberation, of which Kweli states in an interview with XXL Magazine that releasing the album was liberating to him.
In 2007, the album was made available for purchase. In 2007 Kweli signed rapper Jean Grae and the group Strong Arm Steady to Blacksmith Records. Also in 2007, Kweli released his third solo album, Eardrum, on August 21. It debuted at No. 2 on the Billboard 200, supported by the first single, "Listen!!!". Kweli embarked on a national Australian tour in October 2007. Eardrum, which featured a mix of mainstream and underground producers like Kanye West, Just Blaze, will.i.am, Nick Speed and Pete Rock, received generally favorable reviews and went on to sell 129,000 copies after four weeks. Also in 2007, Kweli released a mixtape, entitled Focus. October saw Kweli play one of China's earliest music festivals, the Yue Festival, organised by Split Works, alongside Faithless and Ozomatli.In March 2008, Kweli was featured on MTV's TV show Made as the coach of Colin Colt, a young man who wanted to be made into a rap star. Also in March, Kweli released his Hostile Gospel video which appeared as the "New Joint of the Day" on BET's 106 & Park. Kweli was a featured artist on the 9th Wonder and Buckshot album The Formula, released on April 29, 2008 (on the track "Hold It Down"). Kweli's Blacksmith Records split with Warner Bros. Records in December 2008. Kweli confirmed to AllHipHop.com that Warner Bros. would still distribute Reflection Eternal and Kweli projects, but not other acts on the Blacksmith label. Kweli was featured at the fifth installment of Hot 97 radio personality Peter Rosenberg's acclaimed live interview series "Noisemakers with Peter Rosenberg" on October 21, 2009. Kweli recorded a mixtape entitled Party Robot with singer Res and musician Graph Nobel under the group alias Idle Warship. The mixtape was released as a free download on the website for Kweli's label Blacksmith with two different cover art options in late 2009. There were videos shot for two of the songs from the album: "Bedroom Lights" and "Black Snake Moan".In February 2009, it was announced that Kweli would be featured in the graphic novel-turned-animated series Blokhedz on Missiong.com, voicing the lead part of the character Blak. Additionally, Kweli is a spokesperson and mentor for P'Tones Records a non-profit after school music program whose mission is "to create constructive opportunities for urban youth through no-cost music programs."Kweli and DJ Hi-Tek released a second Reflection Eternal album titled Revolutions Per Minute on May 18, 2010. Revolutions per Minute was recorded at Electric Lady Studios. It is their second album after a 10-year hiatus. The album received generally positive reviews from most music critics, based on an aggregate score of 80/100 from Metacritic.


=== Javotti Media (2010–present) ===
Gutter Rainbows, Kweli's fourth solo album, was the first to be released by his newly formed Javotti Media. The album was originally intended to be a digital-only release, however, on November 16, 2010, Duck Down Records announced its plans to offer Gutter Rainbows a CD release outside US. This included an import edition and a special edition with extras. In its first week, the album sold 13,900 copies in the United States. In December 2010, Kweli appeared with Darryl McDaniels, Mix Master Mike and Ahmet Zappa on a cover of Frank Zappa's "Willie the Pimp" for The Frank Zappa AAAFNRAAAA Birthday Bundle 2010.
In 2011, Kweli was featured on the soundtrack for the film Beat the World with the song "Infinite Love".Kweli's fifth solo album, Prisoner of Conscious, earned its title because of Kweli's constant labeling as a "conscious rapper." It also pays tribute to Nigerian reggae artist Majek Fashek's album Prisoner of Conscience. Before the release of Gutter Rainbows, Kweli began working on P.O.C., and put cuts originally intended for latter on Rainbows. Upon its May 7, 2013, release Prisoner of Conscious was met with generally favorable reviews from music critics, and debuted at number 48 on the Billboard 200 chart. The album featured guest appearances from Nelly, Miguel, Currensy, Kendrick Lamar, and Busta Rhymes. With production by RZA, J. Cole, Oh No, Harry Fraud, and others. The selection of the tracks on this album were more experimental and worked towards illuminating musicality. Kweli went on to release music videos for "Hamster Wheel", "Upper Echelon", and "Come Here" and more.
In August 2013, Kweli announced that in 2014 he would release his next studio album, Gravitas. The album included guest appearances from Raekwon, Black Thought, and The Under Achievers with production by OhNo, Statik Selektah, and J Dilla.
In the summer of 2015, Kweli released another free album entitled Fuck The Money featuring guest appearances from Fall Out Boy's Patrick Stump, Miguel, Styles P and others.
In November 2016, he released a compilation mixtape with to promote Javotti Media's developing artists, Awful People Are Great at Parties.2017 saw two releases from Kweli; The Seven, a joint effort with Styles P of The Lox in April and his eighth solo album, Radio Silence in November.Kweli published his memoir, Vibrate Higher: A Rap Story, in 2021.Partnering with Uproxx in June 2019, Talib Kweli launched a weekly podcast called The People's Party with co-host Jasmin Leigh. The show has aired over one hundred episodes to date. Guests include DMX, Ice Cube and The Game.During the 2020 COVID-19 Pandemic, Talib teamed up with former collaborator Yasiin Bey and longtime friend Dave Chappelle to work on Talib's second podcast venture, The Midnight Miracle.He also confirmed that he plans to reunite with Madlib to offer Liberation 2 and Mos Def for a sophomore Black Star release.


== Javotti Media ==
In 2011, Kweli founded Javotti Media, an independent label. Signed artists have included Cory Mo, Jessica Care Moore, K'Valentine and Brazilian MC Niko Is.


== Controversies ==
In 2014, Kweli's former collaborator, Res was offering a song featuring Kweli, without his permission, in exchange for donations from fans on a crowdfunding page. In 2018, Res posted screenshots of Kweli apologizing for attempting to kiss her to her Instagram account. She also claimed Kweli held her career hostage for rejecting his sexual advances. The case was ultimately dismissed by Judge Carolyn Wade.Kweli was accused of harassing Twitter user Maya Moody in July 2020 after Moody intended to call out Talib, along with other popular figures in music, for only dating or marrying light-skinned black women. Moody tweeted a message that did not specifically mention  Kweli by name.  Kweli later announced on Instagram that he was leaving Twitter "for the green pastures of Patreon." A spokesperson for Twitter stated that Kweli's account had been permanently suspended "after repeated violations of the Twitter rules."


== Politics and activism ==


=== Views ===
Kweli is known for his strong political views and activism, specifically on topics of racial stereotypes and police brutality.He is an advocate on behalf of political prisoners and a supporter of community organizations like the Malcolm X Grassroots Movement. He has spoken often to inner-city high school and college students.Kweli urged people to ask hip-hop artists questions in order to engage them politically, but warned not to get frustrated if artists do not "give you what you want" in their replies. He said that musicians bear an unfair burden to use their music as a platform because they have the ability to influence people. Kweli mentions that artists, just like their audience, fall victim to their upbringing. In 2017, rapper Remedy and Kweli feuded on Twitter regarding Remedy's pro-Israel political stance, which conflicts with Kweli's criticism of Israel's occupation of Palestine, and his criticism of Zionism.In an interview with The Huffington Post, Kweli stated that young people can make a difference because they have the energy to actually go out to the public and do something. He has also stated his belief that activism cannot be done by just sitting at a computer.On June 1, 2019, Kweli was disinvited from the Open Source Festival in Düsseldorf because of his support for BDS which has been classified as antisemitic by the German parliament and his tour of Germany was cancelled. Kweli responded to this on his Facebook page, where he stated, "I would like to perform in Germany but I don't need to. I'd rather be a decent human being and stand up for what's right than censor myself and lie about BDS for a check."


=== Activism ===
Along with Mos Def, Kweli organized the Hip Hop for Respect CD and video in 2000, which spoke out against police brutality and specifically about the death of Amadou Diallo at the hands of New York City police. Profits from the CD were given to the Hip Hop For Respect Foundation, a nonprofit organization that encouraged celebrities to become involved with their fans. The Hip Hop For Respect contained 41 different artists for each shot that the police took at Diallo.In May 2005, Kweli and Mos Def gathered with supporters at City Hall in New York to demand that the federal government drop the million dollar bounty that was placed on political activist Assata Shakur and remove her from the terrorist watch list.Kweli visited the Occupy Wall Street camp in October 2011 to show support for the protestors.On October 1, 2012, Kweli spoke at a rally at city hall to urge the NYPD police to end their stop-and-frisk policy.On August 7, 2013, Kweli traveled to Tallahassee to spend a night in the capital building with the Dream Defenders, a group of students that created a sit-in at the Florida governor's office to protest the state's stand-your-ground law.On August 19, 2014, Kweli traveled to Ferguson, Missouri, to join the community in protesting the shooting of Michael Brown.Kweli joined South African artist Cassper Nyovest on a new remix of his single "Doc Shebeleza", a tribute to the Kwaito music icon of the same name. The original appeared on Nyovest's album Tsholofelo. The remix was produced by Anatii and was released on November 3, 2014, as a free digital download.In 2015, Kweli held two concerts to mark the one year anniversary of Michael Brown's death. The line up for the benefit show "Ferguson is Everywhere" featured Common, Bun B, M1 from Dead Prez, Rapsody, Tef Poe, Kendra Ross, Rebel Diaz, Jasiri X, Immortal Technique, and Pharoahe Monch.


== Discography ==


=== Solo albums ===
Quality (2002)
The Beautiful Struggle (2004)
Eardrum (2007)
Gutter Rainbows (2011)
Prisoner of Conscious (2013)
Gravitas (2013)
Fuck the Money (2015)
Radio Silence  (2017)


=== Collaboration albums ===
Mos Def & Talib Kweli Are Black Star (with Mos Def as Black Star) (1998)
Train of Thought (with Hi-Tek as Reflection Eternal) (2000)
Liberation (with Madlib) (2007)
Revolutions Per Minute (with Hi-Tek as Reflection Eternal) (2010)
Habits of the Heart (with Res as Idle Warship) (2011)
Indie 500 (with 9th Wonder) (2015)
The Seven  (with Styles P) (2017)
Gotham  (with Diamond D) (2021)
No Fear of Time (with Yasiin Bey as Black Star) (2022)
Liberation 2 (with Madlib) (2023)


== Book ==
In 2022, Kweli's memoir, Vibrate Higher: A Rap Story (Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2021), won a PEN Oakland – Josephine Miles Literary Award.


== References ==


== External links ==

Official websiteLamont Coleman (May 30, 1974 – February 15, 1999), known professionally as Big L, was an American rapper. Emerging from Harlem in New York City in 1992, Big L became known among underground hip-hop fans for his freestyling ability. He was eventually signed to Columbia Records, where, in 1995, he released his debut album, Lifestylez ov da Poor & Dangerous. On February 15, 1999, he was fatally shot nine times in his East Harlem neighborhood.
Big L was noted for his use of wordplay, and writers at AllMusic, HipHopDX and The Source have praised him for his lyrical ability. Henry Adaso described him as "one of the most talented poets in hip-hop history."In an interview with Funkmaster Flex, Nas claimed Big L "scared me to death. When I heard [his performance at the Apollo Theater] on tape, I was scared to death. I said, 'Yo, it's no way I can compete if this is what I gotta compete with.'"


== Early life ==
Lamont Coleman was born on May 30, 1974, in the Harlem neighborhood of New York City. He was the third and youngest child of Gilda Terry (d. 2008) and Charles Davis. Davis left the family while Coleman was a child. He had two older half siblings: Donald and Leroy Phinazee (d. 2002). Coleman received the nicknames "Little L" and "Mont-Mont" as a child. His elder brother, Donald Phinazee, took Coleman to a Run-DMC concert at the Beacon Theatre when Coleman was about 7 years old. According to Phinazee, Coleman was awed by the performance which sparked his interest in rapping. By age 12, Coleman became a big hip hop fan and started freestyling with other people in his neighborhood.Coleman began writing rhymes in 1990. He also founded a group known as Three the Hard Way in 1990, but it was quickly broken up due to a lack of enthusiasm among the members which  consisted of Coleman, Doc Reem, and Rodney. No projects were released, and after Rodney left, the group was renamed Two Hard Motherfuckers. Around this time, people started to refer to Coleman as "Big L". In the summer of 1990, Coleman met Lord Finesse at an autograph session in a record shop on 125th Street. After he did a freestyle, Finesse and Coleman exchanged numbers.Coleman attended Julia Richman High School and graduated in 1992. While in high school, Coleman freestyle battled regularly; in his last interview, he stated, "in the beginning, all I ever saw me doing was battling everybody on the street corners, rhyming in the hallways, beating on the wall, rhyming to my friends. Every now and then, a house party, grab the mic, a block party, grab the mic."


== Career ==


=== 1992–1995: First recordings and record deal ===
In 1992, Coleman recorded various demos, some of which were featured on his debut album Lifestylez ov da Poor & Dangerous. On February 11, Coleman appeared on Yo! MTV Raps with Lord Finesse to help promote Finesse's studio album Return of the Funky Man. Coleman's first professional appearance came on "Yes You May (Remix)", the B-side of "Party Over Here" (1992) by Lord Finesse, and his first album appearance was on "Represent" off of Showbiz & A.G.'s Runaway Slave (1992).During this time, he won an amateur freestyle battle hosted by Nubian Productions which consisted of about 2,000 contestants. In 1992, Coleman signed to Columbia Records. He then joined Lord Finesse's Bronx-based hip hop collective Diggin' in the Crates Crew (DITC) which consisted of Lord Finesse, Diamond D, O.C., Fat Joe, Buckwild, Showbiz and A.G. In 1993, Coleman released his first promotional single, "Devil's Son", and later said it was one of the first horrorcore singles, influencing others. He said he wrote the song because "I've always been a fan of horror flicks. Plus the things I see in Harlem are very scary. So I just put it all together in a rhyme." However, he said he preferred other styles over horrorcore.Coleman founded the Harlem rap group Children of the Corn (COC) with Killa Cam (Cam'ron), Murda Mase (Ma$e), Bloodshed and McGruff in 1993. On February 18, 1993, he performed live at the Uptown Lord Finesse Birthday Bash at the 2,000 Club, which included other performances from Fat Joe, Nas, and Diamond D. In 1994, he released his second promotional single "Clinic". On July 11, 1994, Coleman released the radio edit of "Put It On", followed up by the release of the music video three months later. In 1995, the music video for the single "No Endz, No Skinz" debuted. It was directed by Brian Luvar.His debut studio album, Lifestylez ov da Poor & Dangerous, was released in March 1995. The album debuted at number 149 on the Billboard 200 and number 22 on Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums. Lifestylez would go on to sell over 200,000 copies as of 2000. Three singles were released from the album; the first two, "Put It On" and "M.V.P.", reached the top 25 of Billboard's Hot Rap Tracks and the third "No Endz, No Skinz" did not chart.


=== 1996–1999: independent release ===
In 1996, Big L was dropped from Columbia mainly because of a dispute with the label over artistic differences. He stated, "I was there with a bunch of strangers that didn't really know my music."In 1997, he started working on his second studio album, The Big Picture. COC folded when Bloodshed died in a car accident in New York on March 2, 1997. Later that year, DITC appeared in the July issue of On The Go Magazine. Coleman then appeared on O.C.'s single "Dangerous" from O.C.'s second album Jewelz. That November, he was the opening act for O.C.'s European Jewlez Tour.In 1998, Big L formed his own independent label, Flamboyant Entertainment. According to The Village Voice, it "planned to distribute the kind of hip-hop that sold without top 40 samples or R & B hooks." That same year, Coleman released the single "Ebonics". The song, based on African-American Vernacular English, was called one of the top five independent singles of the year by The Source. Also in 1998, DITC released their first single, "Dignified Soldiers".Following the release of  "Ebonics", Big L caught the eye of Damon Dash, the CEO of Roc-A-Fella Records. Dash offered to sign him to Roc-A-Fella, but Big L wanted his crew to sign as well. On February 8, 1999, Coleman, Herb McGruff, C-Town, and Jay-Z started the process to sign with Roc-A-Fella as a group called "The Wolfpack".


== Murder ==
On February 15, 1999, Coleman was killed in a drive-by shooting at 45 West 139th Street in his native Harlem. He was hit nine times in the face and chest. Gerard Woodley, one of Coleman's childhood friends, was arrested three months later for the crime. "It's a good possibility it was retaliation for something Big L's brother did, or Woodley believed he had done," said a spokesperson for the New York City Police Department. Woodley was later released due to lack of evidence, and the murder case remains officially unsolved.Woodley was fatally shot in the head on June 24, 2016. Woodley's family maintains his innocence in Coleman's killing. Rapper Cam'ron, who was a close friend of Coleman and Woodley, posted a video to Instagram claiming Coleman had attempted to murder Woodley a week before his death.In 2017, Lou Black, Gerard Woodley's cousin, published Ethylene: The Rise and Fall of The 139th St. NFL Crew. The book details Black's first hand interactions with the NFL crew and Big L. In the book, Black claims Leroy "Big Lee" Phinazee, Coleman's eldest half-brother and leader of the NFL crew, violated his probation when he was found to be in possession of an illegal weapon and was sentenced to prison. According to Black, while in prison, Phinazee met and contracted a hitman from Brooklyn to murder three members of the NFL gang including Woodley. Phinazee had tasked Big L to identify the targets to the hitman. On the day when the murder was planned, Woodley noticed the hitman following him and successfully scared him off. As Big L had been seen multiple times with the alleged hitman days prior, Woodley assumed Big L had taken part in the attempted shooting. Approximately a week after the attempted shooting of Woodley, Big L was killed. Black did not specify if Woodley personally killed Big L.


== Posthumous releases ==
The tracks "Get Yours", "Way of Life", and "Shyheim's Manchild" b/w "Furious Anger" were released as singles in 1999 for DITC's self-titled album (2000) on Tommy Boy Records. The album peaked at number 31 on R&B/Hip-Hop Albums and number 141 on the Billboard 200. Coleman's first posthumous single was "Flamboyant" b/w "On the Mic", which arrived on May 30, 2000. The single peaked at number 39 on the Billboard Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs and topped the Hot Rap Tracks, making it Coleman's first and only number-one single.
Coleman's second and final studio album, The Big Picture, was released on August 1, 2000, and featured Fat Joe, Tupac Shakur, Guru of Gang Starr, Kool G Rap, and Big Daddy Kane among others. The Big Picture was put together by his manager and partner in Flamboyant Entertainment, Rich King. It contains songs that he had recorded and a cappella recordings that were never used, completed by producers and guest emcees that Coleman respected or had worked with previously.The Big Picture debuted at number 13 on the Billboard 200, number two on Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums, and sold 72,549 copies. The album was certified gold a month later for shipments of 500,000 copies by the RIAA. The Big Picture was the only music by Big L to appear on a music chart outside of the United States, peaking at number 122 on the UK Albums Chart.Children of the Corn: The Collector's Edition, a  compilation album containing COC songs, was released in 2003. Big L's next posthumous album, 139 & Lenox, was released on August 31, 2010. Issued by Rich King on Flamboyant Entertainment, it contained previously unreleased and rare tracks. The follow-up album, Return of the Devil's Son (2010), peaked at number 73 on R&B/Hip-Hop Albums. Coleman's next releases were The Danger Zone (2011), and an album called L Corleone, which was released on February 14, 2012.Coleman is buried at George Washington Memorial Park in Paramus, New Jersey.


== Legacy and influence ==
Henry Adaso, a music journalist for About.com, called him the 23rd-best MC of 1987 to 2007, claiming "[he was] one of the most auspicious storytellers in hip hop history." HipHopDX called Coleman "the most underrated lyricist ever".
Many tributes have been given to Coleman. The first was by Lord Finesse and the other members of DITC on March 6, 1999, at the Tramps. The Source has done multiple tributes to him: first in July 2000, and then in March 2002.XXL also did a tribute to Coleman in March 2003. On February 16, 2005, at SOB's restaurant and nightclub in Manhattan, a commemoration was held for him. It included special guests such as DITC, Herb McGruff, and Kid Capri. All the money earned went to his estate.In 2004, Eminem paid tribute to Coleman in the music video for his single "Like Toy Soldiers". In an interview with MTV, Jay-Z stated: "We were about to sign him right before he passed away. We were about to sign him to Roc-a-Fella. It was a done deal…I think he was very talented…I think he had the ability to write big records, and big choruses." Rapper Nas also said on MTV, "He scared me to death. When I heard that on tape, I was scared to death. I said, 'Yo, it's no way I can compete if this is what I gotta compete with.'"In 2017, Royce da 5'9" said he believed Coleman would have been a "top 3" rapper all time if he had not been killed so prematurely. In 2019, Funkmaster Flex said "People can get mad at me for saying this, but he was the best lyricist at the time. He was a better lyricist than Biggie and Jay-Z. He just didn't have the marketing and promotion. Let me go on the record and say that. It's the truth." In 2022, the 140th Street and Lennox Avenue intersection in Harlem was co-named Lamont "Big L" Coleman Way.


=== Style ===

Coleman is often credited in helping to create the horrorcore genre of hip hop with his 1992 song "Devil's Son." However, not all his songs fall into this genre. For example, in the song "Street Struck," Coleman discusses the difficulties of growing up in the ghetto and describes the consequences of living a life of crime. Idris Goodwin of The Boston Globe wrote that "[Big L had an] impressive command of the English language", with his song "Ebonics" being the best example of this.Coleman was notable for using a rap style called "compounding". He also used metaphors in his rhymes. M.F. DiBella of Allmusic stated Coleman was "a master of the lyrical stickup undressing his competition with kinetic metaphors and a brash comedic repertoire". On the review of The Big Picture, she adds, describing "the Harlem MC as a master of the punch line and a vicious storyteller with a razor blade-under-the-tongue flow." Trent Fitzgerald of Allmusic said Coleman was "a lyrically ferocious MC with raps deadlier than a snakebite and mannerisms cooler than the uptown pimp he claimed to be on records."


=== Documentary ===
A documentary Street Struck: The Big L Story was set to be released in 2017. Directed by a childhood friend and independent film director, Jewlz, approximately nine hours of footage was brought in, and the film's planned runtime was said to be 90 to 120 minutes long. Released on August 29, 2009, the first trailer detailed that Street Struck would contain interviews from his mother Gilda Terry; his brother Donald; childhood friends E-Cash, D.O.C., McGruff, and Stan Spit; artists Mysonne and Doug E. Fresh; producers Showbiz and Premier; and recording DJs Cipha Sounds and Peter Rosenberg. Put together by Coleman's brother Donald, a soundtrack was said to have been made for the documentary as well. As of 2023, both the documentary and soundtrack have yet to be released.


== Discography ==

Studio albumsLifestylez ov da Poor & Dangerous (1995)
The Big Picture (2000)Posthumous studio albums139 & Lenox (2010)
Return of the Devil's Son (2010)
The Danger Zone (2011)Compilation albumsHarlem's Finest – A Freestyle History (2003)
Live from Amsterdam (2003)
Big L: The Archives 1996–2000 (2006)
L Corleone (2012)
Unreleased (2017)
The Concealed Tape (2017)
Straight From The Crate Cave – Big L Edition (2022)Collaborative albumsChildren of the Corn & Big L – Children of the Corn: Collector’s Edition (2003)
J-Love & Big L – In Memory Of... Vol. 2 (2004)
Big L Vs. Big Pun – Night Of The Living Dead Part III (2010)


== See also ==
List of murdered hip hop musicians
List of unsolved murders


== References ==


== Sources ==
Hess, Mickey (2010). Hip Hop in America: A Regional Guide: Volume 1: East Coast and West Coast. ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-0-313-34323-0.
Jasper, Kenji (July 6, 1999). "Of Mics and Men in Harlem". The Village Voice. Archived from the original on August 10, 2013. Retrieved February 6, 2012.


== External links ==

Official website (archived)
Big L at AllMusicCoke La Rock (aka Coco La Rock; born April 24, 1955) is an old-school rapper from New York City who is sometimes credited as being the first MC in the history of hip-hop.In November 2010, Coke La Rock was inducted into the High Times Counterculture Hall of Fame at the annual ceremonies at the Cannabis Cup in Amsterdam.


== Kool Herc and Coke La Rock ==
La Rock was born in The Bronx, New York City on April 24, 1955, with family roots going back to North Carolina.
Coke La Rock was a friend and musical partner of DJ Kool Herc, who himself is generally considered to have laid down the foundation for hip-hop music starting in 1973. La Rock was an original member of Herc's MC crew, the Herculoids. 
According to Herc, Coke La Rock's MC name had various iterations, beginning as "A-1 Coke," and then moving on to "Nasty Coke" before it was finalized as "Coke La Rock".Coke La Rock joined Kool Herc for his first party, in 1973, to celebrate Herc's sister Cindy's birthday. It wasn't until about the fifth or sixth party that he took the name Coke La Rock. The name came to him in a dream. Before that time, he had no name and did his rapping out of sight from the audience, so no one knew who was doing the rapping.His original raps were usually shout-outs to friends, but gradually the poetry emerged. He originated such phrases as "You rock and you don't stop," and "Hotel, motel, you don't tell, we won't tell" (which was immortalized on the first Sugarhill Gang single "Rapper's Delight", although La Rock received no credit).
Coke La Rock's raps were always purely improvisational, unlike those of later 70s-era rap groups, —such as the Furious Five and Cold Crush Brothers, who wrote down and rehearsed their rhymes and created elaborate routines. According to La Rock, while rapping "at first I would just call out [my friends'] names. Then I pretended dudes had double-parked cars; that was to impress the girls. Truthfully, I wasn’t there to rap, I was just playing around."Nonetheless, La Rock's raps would, as with much else at Kool Herc's parties in the mid-1970s, serve as a basic model for other hip-hop artists that would come onto the Bronx music scene by the end of the decade. La Rock himself has argued, in a reference to two pioneering New York City narcotics dealers, that "me and Herc were to hip-hop what Nicky Barnes and Frank Lucas were to drugs."


== Decline in popularity and later years ==
As other nascent hip-hop groups patterned themselves after Herc and La Rock and improved on their formula, the popularity of Herc and the Herculoids began to wane as early as 1977.After Kool Herc was stabbed at a party, La Rock went looking to kill the perpetrator, who was part of the Executive Playhouse crew. He found the man's friends in a Bronx pool hall, but they had already moved their friend down south to avoid a confrontation. After this incident, La Rock decided to step away from hip hop and let the younger generation move in. Since he'd had a long run lasting several years of being on top of the Bronx hip hop scene, La Rock didn't want to continue if murder was going to continue to be part of the game. Also his son, Dante La Rock, had just been born, and he needed to spend more time at home.
Gary Harris, an employee of the first hip-hop record label, Sugar Hill, noted that "people respected Herc and Coke, but by the early eighties those guys were like specters—they just weren’t visible on the scene anymore." In contrast to other early Bronx hip-hop artists like Afrika Bambaataa and Grandmaster Flash, Coke La Rock—like his partner Kool Herc—never achieved any recording success (indeed he did not record at all). However, late 2008 saw the release of what was deemed the first ever recording featuring La Rock, a song titled "Hello – Merry Christmas Baby!" which was released by Sedgwick & Cedar as part of a special holiday compilation to pay homage to the birthplace of hip-hop.La Rock's place in hip-hop history was arguably immortalized in the legendary 1986 Boogie Down Productions song "South Bronx" (the opening salvo of the so-called "Bridge Wars") wherein KRS-One raps this:

Now way back in the days when hip-hop began
With Coke La Rock, Kool Herc, and then Bam

Coke La Rock had no association with, nor relation to, KRS-One's DJ at the time, Scott La Rock. Nor did Coke La Rock and another influential old-school MC, T La Rock, know one another in the early days of hip-hop, and thus the name similarity is coincidental.In 2021, after years of being absent from the hip hop scene, Coke La Rock returned to the microphone with a verse on the DJ Kay Slay posse track "Rolling 110 Deep".


== References ==


== External links ==
Coke La Rock on Myspace
2008 interview with La Rock
2010 interview with Coke La Rock where he explains the origin of his name, his heritage, why he stepped away from hip hop on YouTubeScott Monroe Sterling (March 2, 1962 – August 27, 1987), known by the stage name DJ Scott La Rock, was an American hip-hop disc jockey and music producer from the Bronx, New York. He was a founding member of the East Coast hip hop group Boogie Down Productions. He was also known for his association with the rapper KRS-One who was a member of Boogie Down Productions.
Sterling's death in August 1987 is said to be the first murder of a major hip hop artist.


== Early life ==
Scott Sterling was born on March 2, 1962, in the Bronx, New York City. His parents separated when he was four years old, so he was raised by his mother, Carolyn Morant, a municipal employee. They moved from Queens, New York City, to the Bronx: first Morrisania and then Morris Heights.
He excelled in both academics and sports at Our Saviour Lutheran High School, graduating in 1980. He attended Castleton State College in Vermont and earned a varsity letter in basketball there.


== Career ==
La Rock returned to New York City in hopes of finding work and making inroads to the music industry. Through a connection of his mother's, La Rock landed a job as a social worker at Franklin Armory Men's Shelter on 166th Street in the Bronx. At night, though, he spun records at the hip hop hot spot the Broadway Repertoire Theatre.During his time as a social worker, La Rock met rapper KRS-One in 1986 at Franklin Men's Shelter where KRS resided. The pair formed Boogie Down Productions (BDP) with DJ Derrick "D-Nice" Jones, a cousin of the shelter's security guard, Floyd Payne. The group's 1987 debut album, Criminal Minded, is considered a hip hop classic.


== Shooting ==
On August 27, 1987, D-Nice was assaulted by men upset that he had been talking to one of their ex-girlfriends. D-Nice asked La Rock to help defuse the situation. Later that day, La Rock, Scotty "Manager Moe" Morris, DJ McBooo, D-Nice and BDP bodyguard Darrell rode a Jeep CJ-7 to the Highbridge Homes Projects building on University Avenue in the South Bronx. As they were leaving, bullets were fired through the side and top of the Jeep. La Rock struck his head on the dashboard, not realizing at the time he had been struck by a bullet in the back of his head. He was driven to Lincoln Hospital. He was conscious as he was wheeled into the emergency department, telling doctors he was feeling cold and tired. He died in the operating room.
Two men were arrested and charged with La Rock's murder, but they were acquitted at the trial.


== Discography ==
Criminal Minded (1987)
By All Means Necessary (1988) (La Rock was killed during the making of this album)
Man & His Music (Remixes from Around the World) (1997)
Best of B-Boy Records (2001)


== See also ==
List of murdered hip hop musicians


== References ==Wendy Clark (born c. 1962), better known by her stage name Lady B, is an American female rapper and radio DJ from Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. She is one of the earliest female rappers in hip hop, and one of the first hip hop artists to record a single, "To the Beat, Y'all", in 1979. She began her career with radio station WHAT in 1979, and recorded her first single later that year, "To the Beat Y'all". The song, the title of which became a stock rap phrase, was first released by TEC, a local Philadelphia-based record label, and released again in 1980 by Sylvia Robinson's rap label, Sugar Hill Records.


== Career ==
Clark recorded her first single, "To the Beat, Y'all," on the Sugar Hill record label in 1979.Clark's rise and longevity (3 decades) in hip-hop earned her the title as Godmother of hip-hop. She is one of the first DJs to play rap records on the radio outside New York, playing artists such as Will Smith and Soulsonic Force at the start of their careers. She had encountered the New York City rap scene while traveling with World B.Free, ex-player of the Philadelphia 76ers basketball team.In 1979, Mary Mason on WRNB 100.3 gave Lady B her own weekend show, which transformed into a success and brought hip hop to the radio in Philly. and was a large success.
In 1984, Lady B moved to Philadelphia's Power 99 FM and started the program The Street Beat, which blew the radio station's ratings through the roof. She ran this program until 1989. She later broadcast for Sirius Satellite Radio in New York City. She also worked for WRNB 100.3 in Philadelphia until she was dismissed in December 2017.


== Awards and recognitions ==
Lady B has received numerous awards throughout her career. In 2002, she received the "Philly Urban Legend Award", which acknowledges pioneers in rap music. The World Renowned Entertainment,” Role Model of Excellence Award, two Lifetime Achievement Awards (including the Douglass”Jocko” Henderson award) and is also listed in VIBE magazine's History of Hip-Hop as “maybe the most influential female in hip- hop radio history”.On August 13, 2022 the city of Philadelphia renamed the 5700 block of Wyndale Avenue “Lady B Way” in recognition to her accomplishments.


== References ==

12. https://www.instagram.com/tv/ChNMEFcJJk-/?igshid=YmMyMTA2M2Y=


== External links ==
Lady B at AllMusic
Lady B discography at Discogs
Lady B discography at MusicBrainz
Lady B. and Chuck Chillout on STREET BEAT (video clip)
Lady B DJ info on WRNB 107.9 radio Philadelphia, archived July 15, 2011


=== See also ===
Sha-RockRochelle Ryndia Ray (Camden, New Jersey) is an American rapper, singer, songwriter and music producer, better known as Lady Crush. She is recognized for being one of the youngest female rappers to be recorded on vinyl record towards the end of the Old-school hip-hop era. Lady Crush was featured in Clover Hope's 2021 book 'The Motherlode: 100+ Women Who Made Hip-Hop' 


== Career ==
Lady Crush made her rapping debut in 1984 when she won a citywide radio contest, gaining a guest appearance on Tim Greene's single "The Facts of Life" (Importe/12, SugarScoop Records). The song later received mainstream recognition when the late famed remixer COD, remixed the song creating "The Dub of Life". This 12" was officially released in early 1985. Lady Crush decided, later in 1985 to launch her solo career after leaving the group. "MC Perpetrators", is currently labeled as a worldwide, rare and valuable classic Rap record, being sold as high as $610.In 2018, after more than 30 years in Hip-Hop, Lady Crush returned post-adult with two Electro hop, Underground hip hop and Dirty rap singles "F**k" and "F**k (The Banga)". The "Fifty Shades of F**k" EP soon followed, remixing her previous related series of songs.


== Discography ==


=== Singles ===
1985: "MC Perpetrators" (KAM Executive Records)
2018: "F**k" (Queen Empire Records)
2018: "F**k (The Banga)" (Queen Empire Records) (Lady Crush w/ Banga Boy)


=== Features ===
1984: "The Facts of Life" (Importe/12, SugarScoop Records) (Tim Greene featuring Lady Crush and Baby T)
2016: "She No Lie, She On Fire" (Q2D Ent/Queen Empire Records) (Banga Boy featuring Lady Crush and Castle) 


=== Extended plays ===
2018 "Fifty Shades of F**k" EP (Queen Empire Records)


== References ==


== External links ==
Official websiteAl Sherrod Lambert (pronounced æl ʃɛrəd læmbərt; born June 29, 1985), sometimes known as simply A-Rod, is a Grammy Award winning American producer, singer, songwriter, and musician. He has won recognition as a gospel, pop, hip hop and R&B producer. He is signed to Kobalt Music Group and is a registered BMI songwriter.


== Personal life ==
Lambert was born in Newark, New Jersey. He grew up in nearby Irvington and attended Irvington High School and Bloomfield College where he graduated in 2008. In 2010 Lambert moved to Los Angeles where he maintains residency with his wife and daughter.


== Career ==


=== Producing and songwriting ===
Lambert started his music career in 2010 when he worked on the songs "Sleeping Pills" and "All Said and Done" on the Jamie Foxx album Best Night of My Life with fellow New Jersey producer and songwriter Eric Hudson. The Following year he wrote "25/8" for Mary J Blige  as well as the title track for the film Think Like a Man. The song was co written by Harmony Samuels and Eric Bellinger and features the vocals of Jennifer Hudson, Ne Yo, and Rick Ross.In 2013, Lambert wrote several songs for the Fantasia Barrino album Side Effects of You. The album was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Urban Contemporary Album at the 52nd Annual Grammy Awards, as well as a nomination for Best Traditional R&B Performance for the single "Get it Right" and a nomination for Best R&B Song for "Without Me". That same year he received two Billboard Pop Awards at the BMI Awards for his work on the Ariana Grande singles "The Way" and "Right There". "The Way" peaked at #9 on the Billboard hot 100 and spent 28 weeks on the charts. The song is RIAA certified double platinum. "Right There" peaked at #84 on the Billboard Hot 100 and spent 8 weeks on the charts. The single is RIAA certified gold.
In 2014 Lamber co-wrote the Michelle Williams song "Say Yes". The song features backing vocals by former Destiny's Child members Kelly Rowland  and Beyonce Knowles. The song peaked at #1, staying on the Billboard Hot 100 chart for 38 weeks. It was nominated for a Soul Train Award for best Gospel/Inspirational Song, and received four nominations at the 2015 Stellar Awards including a win for Music Video of the Year.
In 2017 Lambert was a songwriter on the Lalah Hathaway album Lalah Hathaway Live which received a Grammy Award for R&B Album of the Year. The album peaked at #2 on the Billboard Hot 100 and stayed on the charts for 12 weeks. He also wrote the single "Sexy Body" by Pitbull, and the singles "What is Love" and "Good Woman" on the La'Porsha Renae album Already All Ready. 
Later Lambert would keep his hit songwriting and producitin career moving full steam ahead by co-producing “March 14”’on Drakes Scorpion album, co writing “Made for Now” for the legendary Janet Jackson and co—writing “Borderline” for r and b superstar Brandy in 2020.
In 2021 Lambert would become a main writer for the legendary Ronald Isley and The Isley Brothers penning three songs for the Rock & Roll hall of famers. 
He now is releasing his on music under his artist name POINTS for his record label Points On The Board.


== Discography ==


=== Songwriting and production credits ===
No Chaser- Coco Jones (2022)
Great Escape- The Isley Brothers Featuring Trey Songz (2022)
Love Song - The Isley Brothers (2022)
If I Should Die Tonight- Swizz Beatz & Ronald Isley (2021) SINGLE
Borderline- Brandy Norwood (2020) SINGLE
Misery - Good Girl (2019) SINGLE
Love Riddim - Rotimi (2019) SINGLE
March 14 - Drake (2019)
Confidence - Colby O'donis (2019) SINGLE
Keep Me Waiting - The Bonfyre (2018)
Made For Now - Janet Jackson Feat. Daddy Yankee (2018) SINGLE
Sexy Body - Pitbull Feat. Jennifer Lopez (2017)
What Is Love - La'Porsha Renae (2017)
Good Woman - La'Porsha Renae (2017) SINGLE
Burn Me Down - Nathan Sykes (2016)
Lovin' You - Trey Songz Ft. Ty Dolla Sign (2015)
In The Air - Victon (2017)
Let Me Know Tamar Braxton Feat Future (2015) SINGLE
Apology - Austin Mahone (2015)
Save Me Now - Dorinda Clarke Cole (2015)
Believe in Me - Michelle Williams (2015)
That's Me Right There - Jasmine V feat. Kendrick Lamar (single) (2014) SINGLE
Supernatural Love Fantasia Barrino featuring Big K.R.I.T. (2014)
Boss - Omarion Feat. Rick Ross (single) (2014) SINGLE
Say Yes Michelle Williams Feat Beyonce and Kelly Rowland (2014) SINGLE
Too Close - Ariana Grande (2014)
You Don't Know Me - Ariana Grande (2014)
Fall - Michelle Williams feat. Lecrae and Tye Tribbett (2014)
Free - Michelle Williams(2014)
Everything - Michelle Williams (2014)
Say Yes - B5 (single) (2013)
House Party - Mindless Behavior (2013)
Almost is Never Enough Ariana Grande (2013) SINGLE
The Way Ariana Grande Feat Mac Miller (2013)  SINGLE
Right There Ariana Grande Feat Big Sean (2013) SINGLE
My Everything Ariana Grande (2013)
Better Left Unsaid Ariana Grande (2013)
Haunted Fantasia Barrino Feat Tank, King Los, Al Sherrod Lambert and Jamia (2013)
Without Me Fantasia Barrino Feat Kelly Rowland and Missy Elliot (2013) SINGLE
Ain’t All Bad Fantasia Barrino (2013)
Get It Right Fantasia Barrino (2013)
End of Me Fantasia Barrino (2013)
Yes - Michelle Williams
If We Had Your Eyes Michelle Williams Feat. Fantasia Barrino (2013) SINGLE
Three Words Marcus Canty (2013) SINGLE
Think Like A Man Jennifer Hudson Ne-Yo Rick Ross (2012) SINGLE
From Above - Not The Same Girl (2011) SINGLE
25/8 Mary J Blige (2011) SINGLE
Sleeping Pill - Jamie Foxx (2010)
All Said and Done - Jamie Foxx (2010)


=== As a featured artist ===
Haunted Fantasia Barrino Feat Tank, King Los, Al Sherrod Lambert and Jamia


=== For film ===
Think Like A Man For The Movie Think Like A Man Jennifer Hudson Feat Ne-Yo and Rick Ross (2012)
Say Yes Michelle Williams Feat Beyonce and Kelly Rowland (Video short) (2014)
The Way Ariana Grande Feat. Mac Miller (Video short) (2013)


== Awards ==
Grammy Awards
2014 – Best R&B Song Fantasia Barrino "Without Me" - Nominated
2014 – Best Traditional R&B Performance Fantasia Barrino "Get it Right" - Nominated
2014 - Best Urban Contemporary Album Fantasia Barrino - "Side Effects of You" - Nominated
2017 - Best R&B Album Lalah Hathaway "Lalah Hathaway Live" - Won
BMI Awards
2014 - Billboard Pop Award Ariana Grande The Way - Won
2015 - Billboard Pop Award Ariana Grande Feat. Big Sean Right There - Won
Soul Train Music Awards
2016 - Gospel Song of the Year Michelle Williams Say Yes - Nominated
Stellar Awards
2015 - Song of the Year Michelle Williams Say Yes - Nominated
2015 - Urban/Inspirational/Instrumental Single/Performance of the Year Michelle Williams Say Yes - Nominated
2015 - Music Video of the Year Michelle Williams Say Yes - Won


=== Awards ===


== References ==


== External links ==
Al Sherrod Lambert on Instagram
Al Sherrod Lambert at IMDbSade Lamiere Davis known as Lamiere is an American rapper from The Bronx, New York born in year 1990. Her first notable appearance was on Snapchat reality series "Second Chance" which aired in December 2019.


== Life and career ==
Sade Lamiere Davis professionally known as Lamiere was born September 8, 1990, and  is an African American Bronx native raised by a single mother in NYC's Housing projects.  Lamiere was a high performing student and graduated the 8th grade as the salutatorian of her class.  Lamiere began rapping at the age of 16 and was influenced by her mother who was a rapper in the 1990's. However she did not see rapping as more than a hobby until age 23 during her first visit to a professional recording studio.  Lamiere was also influenced to persue rapping, after experiencing racism within corporate America Lamiere took on many freelance modeling and background acting gigs to make money for studio time. Lamiere had been featured in the Jadakiss and Rick Ross music video "Kiss the Sky," as well a Mr. Cheeks "New York City" music video. Lamiere debuted her first single "Lone Ranger" in February 2020. Lamiere is presently an independent artist and writes, records and mixes her own music.


== Musical style ==
Lamiere is a Hip-hop artist. She releasing music in many different sub-genres of Hiphop including New York Drill, melodic, dance and twerk.


== Influences ==
Lamiere has noted several musical influences including Nicki Minaj, Remy Ma, JayZ, Beyonce, Drake, Biggie Smalls, Kevin Gates and Lil Kim. She stated that she frequently listens to music from Doja Cat, Megan the Stallion, Stunna Girl ,Lakeyah, Lola Brooke, Ice Spice and Cardi B. 


== Discography ==


=== Singles ===


== References ==Daniel Boimah Kenney Knero Lapaé Edwards II (born May 19, 1985), better known as Knero Lapaé or simply Knero (stylized as kNERO; pronounced knee ro la pay), is a Liberian rapper, singer, songwriter, record producer, model, and author. His music is a mixture of Hip hop and Afrobeats.


== Personal life and family members ==
kNERO was born in Monrovia, Liberia and raised in Brooklyn, New York. His father is Gola and his mother is from the Kpelle tribe. He is one of four children of Sara Léla and Rev. D. Boimah Lapaé Edwards, who was the youngest Liberian to managed an American corporation in Liberia. His father is currently the President of the non-profit organization, The Bomi County Association. kNERO was brought up in a predominant political background. He is the nephew of Liberia's 24th president Ellen Johnson Sirleaf. He has an uncle who was a judge of the Magistrate Court, a District Commissioner, and County Development Coordinator for the Ministry of Internal Affairs. He is also the first cousin of Richard B. Devine, a former Senator of Liberia. His family was fortunate enough to escape the Liberian Civil War as a result of his father's achievements, but still suffers the loss of family and friends.


== Music career and performances ==
kNERO released "Not Drunk Enuff" featuring Norwegian singer Adele Erichsen, a former contestant on The Voice – Norges beste stemme. The single was released under CCAP records. Due to his political ties, he celebrated the Liberian Declaration of Independence by performing his single "A.F.R.I.C.A" at the Liberian Embassy in Washington, D.C. He performed at the Hip Hop of Pioneers event held at the Newark Symphony Hall; the event featured additional performances from MC Lyte, Kool and the Gang, Dana Dane and Slick Rick.Between 2006 and 2007, he performed at The Fox Theatre in Atlanta for Dr. Malachi Z. York's 11th Annual Nuwaupu Ball; his name was announced alongside Erykah Badu, Jimmy Cliff and Musiq Soulchild. kNERO released his single "My Thang" featuring Jamal "Gravy" Woolard and former Roc-A-Fella artist Amil, which appeared on several urban blog sites.In 2014, kNERO closed a deal to release his next single "King" under Universal Music Group.


=== Music Influences ===
While growing up, kNERO listened to artists such as Buck Shot, Smif N Wessun, Jay Z, The Notorious B.I.G., Nas, Phil Collins, Sade Adu, Fela Kuti, Prodigy, Big Daddy Kane, Biz Markie, Rakim, Raekwon, Ghostface Killah, KRS-One, 50 Cent, Kool G Rap, Tracy Chapman and Bob Marley.


== Other works ==


=== Barber career ===
In 1995, kNERO fell in love with the art of barbering. To avoid street violence and other criminal activities, he learned to master his craft over the years. He then travels from state to state gaining connections in the hair industry, which helped his music career. His limitless experiences, becoming rapper Raekwon from the Wu-Tang Clan personal barber. Gaining clients as Comedian Kyle Grooms, Fashion Designer Toure Designs, Humanitarian/Motivational speaker George Green, Celebrity Hairstylist Keith Campbell, Middleweight Boxer Peter Quillin, and more.


=== Modeling and clothing ===
In 2012, kNERO was a model for photos of The Toure Designs' fall season collection. Later that year, the model in The Toure Designs' Target First Saturdays "Carnival Inspired Fashion" themed at the Brooklyn Museum. He continued to walk the runway alongside actress/singer Demetria Mckinney, modeling for Toure Designs' for the 2015 Mercedes Benz Fashion week presented by ICU Network hosted by SB Stunts.


=== Acting ===
kNERO Lapaé has made an appearance in the 2013 film Living With No Regrets, with Clifton Powell, Marc John Jefferies, rapper AZ, Charlie Baltimore, Treach and more.In 2014, kNERO landed a role on Red Dot a series about a group of trained killers, which expands into stories of many other individuals that they come into contact with. He first appeared in the Red Dot episode "The Walking Dead", as Fritzoy, a goon of a hit-man leader named Cassius who's out for revenge after finding out his friend Eddie was murdered.


=== Memoir ===
Homeless With A Record Deal: The Moments Of Luxury (January 2016)


== Discography ==


=== Singles ===


== Awards and nominations ==


=== Liberia Music Awards ===


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website
kNERO Lapaé on TwitterLawrence Hill (born September 4, 1971) better known by his stage name Larry Larr is an American rapper and businessman. He first came in the music wave with other Philadelphia rappers such as Schooly D, Steady B and DJ Jazzy Jeff & The Fresh Prince in the mid eighties. He first signed his deal with Ruffhouse Records and released his debut album entitled "Da Wizzard Of Odds" in 1991 with the lead single "Larry, That’s What They Call Me" which only charted on the Hot Rap Songs at the position 7 and his second single "Confused" only made it at 10 on the Hot Rap Songs as well. However the album didn't sell well only making 67 on Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums chart.


== Studio albums ==


== References ==Robert Torres, also known as Sabor Latino (born June 21, 1972) is an American hip hop artist and author. He is from Jamaica, Queens, New York. Sabor Latino creates music to inspire individuals to become productive members of society.


== Early life and education ==
Sabor Latino, also known as Robert Torres, was raised in Jamaica, Queens, New York by his Puerto Rican father and Dominican mother. While in middle school, he became interested in music at twelve. During this time, Sabor Latino began writing about the life struggles, education and emotions he was experiencing. He graduated from Boricua College with a bachelor's degree in education and a minor in psychology. He graduated from Lehman College in January 2017 with a master's in education with a minor in administration.


== Career ==
Sabor Latino worked as a social worker for a foster care agency in South Jamaica, Queens. He released his first album, Observaciones de Mi Vida, Vol. 1 on February 28, 2013. The album was mixed by producer Lee Evans. The experiences Sabor Latino witnessed while working for the foster care agency influenced his first album. The album consists of eight songs and two poems that are meant to inspire children, adolescents, parents and adults to become productive members of society. Sabor Latino chose to produce the album in Spanish in attempt to create a positive image in the Latin American community. In 2014, Sabor Latino was recognized by Hot 97 on its "Who's Next" list. In 2014, Sabor Latino announced the release of his autobiography titled Sabor Latino: My Life.In November 2014, Sabor Latino released his biography, Sabor Latino: My Life, which combines his personal experiences with his social-work career to inspire youth. Commenting on his music career, Torres said "he still identifies as a social worker, just of a different kind than before." He announced that his single, "Anything In Life Is Possible," and his second book, Sabor Latino's Greatest Poems & Songs, would be released in 2016. His second book was eventually titled "Mis Grandes Canciones y Poemas" and was released in 2017; his third, titled "125 Quotes Gathered from my Life Observations" was released in 2018. His fourth book, "My alma mater Lehman College" is set for publication in February 2019. Sabor Latino released his second album “Observaciones de mi Vida Vol. 2,” in October 2021.


== Bibliography ==
Torres, Roberto (2015). My Life: Sabor Latino. New York: BookBaby. ISBN 9781631925344.
Torres, Roberto (2017). Sabor Latino: Mis grandes canciones y poemas. New York: BookBaby. ISBN 9781483591780.
Torres, Roberto (2018). 125 Quotes Gathered from my Life Observations. New York: BookBaby. ISBN 9781543929669.
Torres, Roberto (2019). My alma mater Lehman College. New York: BookBaby. ISBN 9781543959383.


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Beautifully-written hip hop, exuding positivity: Meet Sabor Latino
"Sabor Latino presenta una opción de música diferente" - Dos Mundos
"Featured Author Roberto Torres" - Book Reader Magazine


== External links ==
Official website
"Latin Flavor" - Yo Raps
What The Game Is Missing w/ Sabor Latino
The Bee Talks With... Sabor Latino/Robert TorresAnthony Leedel Norris (born February 11, 1990) is an American hip hop record producer and songwriter, professionally known as Lee on the Beats. Lee has produced for artists such as Lil Wayne, DJ Khaled, Kid Ink, Ace Hood, French Montana, Rick Ross, Meek Mill and Freeway, among others. In 2013, Lee was signed to DJ Khaled's We the Best Music Group. He is best known for producing French Montana’s “Pop That” and co-producing Khaled’s “Do You Mind”.


== Career ==
As a teenager Lee on the Beats started rapping and begun producing for local acts in Queens, New York. His family was more involved in the business and executive side of things. For example, His uncle, Skane Dolla was DJ Clue's manager as well as one of the owners of Desert Storm Records. He helped A&R projects for artists like Ludacris, Method Man, DMX, Fabolous, and Joe Budden for Def Jam. Lee was around for all of it, so he learned a lot growing up. Lee started a team called, The Amazinz with his cousin Roc Da Producer. From there they started looking for producers they could build the team. The current members are Roc, Dane, Jabarrie, Murrille, Mae N. Maejor, Robbin, and LDB.Lee kn the Beats early major production credits included Kid Ink's "Is It You" and co-production on Freeway's "Superstar" featuring Meek Mill. In 2012, it only took Lee On the Beats three hours to create the beat for "Pop That", which he then gave to New York rapper Chinx Drugz, who then passed it on to French Montana. The 2 Live Crew sampling song, that would feature rappers Lil Wayne, Drake and Rick Ross, became the lead single from Montana's debut studio album Excuse My French. The song would end up peaking at number 36 on the Billboard Hot 100, and would be shortly certified Platinum by the RIAA.In March 2013, DJ Khaled announced that he had signed Lee On the Beats, to his record label We the Best Music Group. Following his signing, he produced two song's on Ace Hood's fourth studio album Trials & Tribulations including the single "We Outchea". In July 2013, Lee On the Beats was named one of the "top ten young producers on the rise", by BET. On August 2, 2013, DJ Khaled released "I Wanna Be With You", the second single from his album Suffering from Success, which was produced by Lee On the Beats and featured Rick Ross, Future and Nicki Minaj. He also co-produced two more songs on the album, "You Don't Want These Problems" and "I'm Still". In October 2013, Lee revealed that he would release an instrumental project in 2014. The instrumental mixtape titled Catch the Vibe was released on February 11, 2014.


== Production style ==
Lee on the Beats has said that his production style is influenced by IC3T3K 2K, Pharrell Williams, Ryan Leslie, and Swiss Beatz.


== Production discography ==


=== Singles produced ===


=== Other credits ===


== References ==Hee-Sun Lee (born June 4, 1983), known professionally by the stage name HeeSun Lee, is an American Christian hip hop musician. Her first studio album released by Jahrock'n in 2008, Re:Defined.. She released, Stereotypes, in 2014, with In My City Records. This was her Billboard chart breakthrough release.


== Early life ==
HeeSun Lee was born Hee-Sun Lee on June 4, 1983, in Seoul, South Korea, but was abandoned by both of her birth parents at four months old. She was then adopted by Chinese-American immigrants, who brought her to live and reside in Staten Island, New York.


== Music career ==
Her music career got started in 2008, with the release of Re:Defined. by Jahrock'n Productions. She released her second album, Stereotypes, on January 21, 2014, with In My City Records. This would be her Billboard chart breakthrough album on the Top Gospel Albums chart at No. 25. The album was reviewed by Wade-O Radio where they called it "a great one", Jam the Hype receiving a 7.6 out of ten, and Reel-Gospel receiving a three out of five star rating.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===


== References ==William Lee Barefield III (born December 17, 1987), better known by his stage name Trip Lee, is an American Christian rapper and singer. Signed to Reach Records, he has recorded both as a solo artist and as a founding member of the 116 Clique. Originally from Dallas, Texas, he serves as a young adult pastor at Concord Church. His third album, Between Two Worlds (2010), was nominated for two Dove Awards and won the Stellar Award for Best Hip Hop Album in 2011.


== Biography ==


=== Early life ===
William Lee Barefield III was born on December 17, 1987, in Dallas, Texas. As a young boy, Lee had dreams of being a professional athlete or a famous rapper, and he began to hone his lyrical skills at the age of 12. "I rapped about random stuff… how hot I was, how many girls I could pull," Lee says. But upon giving his life to Christ, at age 14, his focus changed from fortune, fame, and women to serving and ministering the Gospel.
Lee slowly recognized that all of his life should be centered around Christ. "One day, I just decided, I'm only doing Christian hip hop. Rappers like Ambassador and Da' T.R.U.T.H. helped provide a model for how I would begin to do that," he says. He also had an immense desire to learn and teach the Word of God, so he became a leader in his youth group where he preached his first sermon at age 17.In 2004, Lee met Lecrae at a concert; months later, after talking and building with each other, Lecrae began to disciple him. While still in high school, Lee was given the opportunity to pen a few devotionals for the Reach Records website that dealt with theological matters and showcased his spiritual maturity.Lee attended Cairn University and Boyce College, the undergraduate school of Southern Baptist Theological Seminary in Louisville, Kentucky.


=== Music career ===
Trip Lee signed with Reach Records, and his debut album, If They Only Knew, was released a few days after his high school graduation. His first full-length album introduced hip-hop fans to his distinct southern sound, unique delivery, and gospel-saturated lyrics. That same year, he was also featured on the Dove Award-nominated, Jesus Muzik with label mate Lecrae.
His second album, 20/20, was released in 2008 and garnered much success, breaking into the Billboard Top 200 and reaching No. 11 on the Billboard Christian albums chart and No. 4 on the Gospel chart. Back with his third studio album, Between Two Worlds, Lee offers a collection of reflections on life in a fallen world. His hope is that his reflections not only resonate with listeners, but also point to Jesus as the hero.
Since his first album release, Lee has traveled the world doing concerts for thousands of listeners, and his last three summers have been spent on national and international tours with his Reach label mates. His Christ-centered hip-hop message has also built a platform for him among churches and other Christian organizations, which has led to numerous opportunities to preach and teach at conferences and other events.
Lee released two new singles "Brag on My Lord" and "King Like Mine", the latter featuring Alex Medina, on March 29, 2011.Trip Lee released his fourth full-length studio album, entitled The Good Life on April 9, 2012. The album featured various notable Christian artists, such as Sho Baraka (formerly signed with Reach Records), JR., Lecrae, J.Paul, KB, Andy "C-Lite" Mineo, Jimmy Needham, V. Rose, Suzy Rock, Jai, and Leah Smith. As a continuation to the album, Lee has worked with Moody Publishers and has authored a book titled The Good Life, to be released October 1, 2012.On October 9, 2012, Lee announced he would be "stepping away" from music altogether. The Unashamed 2012 tour with the Reach Records roster was his final tour before pursuing a career as an author and pastor. He later clarified that while he would continue to make music, he wouldn't be touring as much. He is currently training to be a pastor at his local church, while still engaging in public ministry.On October 27, 2014, Trip Lee released his fifth studio album, Rise. On January 27, 2015, he released his second book called Rise: Get Up and Live in God's Great Story to accompany the album. He was part of the Winter Jam Tour 2016 along with KB and Tedashii in the central and eastern parts of the United States.On December 9, 2016, Trip Lee released a mixtape titled, "The Waiting Room." The title was inspired by a line in the song, "Take Me There" from his, "The Good Life" album. He says the album highlights the fact that, as a Christian, his life is much like sitting in a waiting room, looking for what God has ahead.On March 4, 2022, Trip Lee released his sixth studio album "The End." his first project in six years (first since 2016). The album released three singles "Supernatural," "Stone" and "Right Out The Gate." The album also featured artists WHATUPRG, Wande, Taylor Hill, KB, and Desi Raines.


=== Ministry ===
In early 2011, he did the pastoral internship at Capitol Hill Baptist Church in Washington, D.C.In 2014, he became pastoral assistant at Capitol Hill Baptist Church in Washington, D.C.In 2015, he became pastor at Cornerstone Church West End in Atlanta.In 2019, he became young adult pastor at Concord Church Dallas, Texas.


=== Personal life ===
Trip Lee married Jessica Barefield in 2009. The couple have three children.


== Discography ==

Studio albums

2006: If They Only Knew
2008: 20/20
2010: Between Two Worlds
2012: The Good Life
2014: Rise
2022: The End
2023: The Epilogue


== Books ==
The Good Life (Moody Publishers, 2012)
Rise: Get Up and Live in God's Great Story (Thomas Nelson, 2015)


== Award nominations ==
GMA Dove AwardsStellar Awards


== References ==Khalif Libasse Diouf, known by the stage name Kalifa (born April 6, 1989), formerly known by the stage name Le1f (), is an American rapper and producer. Diouf also founded the record label Camp & Street, with Boody, DonChristian, and Chaz Requina. Diouf garnered attention for unique musical and performance styles, as well as his role as an openly gay rapper. Following a series of well-received mixtapes and EPs,  Diouf's debut studio album, Riot Boi, was released in November 2015.


== Biography ==
Born in Manhattan, Diouf studied ballet and modern dance, attended the Concord Academy with the class of 2007 and earned a degree in dance from Wesleyan University before returning to the city to become a rapper.


== Career ==
Initially known for producing tracks for Brooklyn-based alternative hip-hop group Das Racist, such as their popular debut single "Combination Pizza Hut and Taco Bell", Diouf became known as a solo artist with the release of debut mixtape Dark York, released in April 2012. Its second single, the 5kinAndBone5-produced "Wut" garnered attention as the standout track from the project and manifested into a music video in June 2012.In November 2012, Le1f was featured on the song "Fuckin the DJ" by Mykki Blanco (which was co-produced with Diouf collaborator, Boody) from their Cosmic Angel: The Illuminati Prince/ss mixtape. Later that month, Le1f released a joint EP with Boody, titled Liquid, which was followed by an accompanying video for the promotional single, "Soda". Diouf's second mixtape Fly Zone was released to generally favorable reviews in January 2013 and later spawned a video for the successful "Spa Day". The mixtape featured guest appearances from artists such as Heems, DonChristian and Kitty.In August 2013, Le1f publicly criticised the rapper Macklemore for the latter's song "Thrift Shop", claiming that it borrowed its beat extensively from Le1f's own earlier song, "Wut", and proceeded to criticise Macklemore for another of his songs, "Same Love", claiming that it was not appropriate for a heterosexual to exploit an LGBT rights issue for financial gain.

In September 2013, Diouf released a third full-length mixtape Tree House and later accompanied it with a music video for the second single "Hush Bb" directed by conceptual artist Alex Da Corte.In February 2013, Terrible Records announced Diouf's record deal as well as an EP, a five-track project titled Hey, which was later released on March 11, 2014. On March 13, 2014, Diouf made an appearance on national television with a performance on the Late Show with David Letterman.In November 2015, Diouf released a full-length studio album on XL and Terrible Records. The album features contributions and production work from artists such as Evian Christ, Junglepussy, Balam Acab, Lunice, Boody, Sophie, Dev Hynes, and Dubbel Dutch, among others. In 2017, Le1f was part of the line up for the 17th edition of the Sonic Acts Festival in Amsterdam, which explored The Noise of Being. Diouf has also performed several times at Sonic Acts club night called Progress Bar.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===
Riot Boi (2015, XL/Terrible Records)


=== EPs ===
Liquid (2012, Boysnoize Records) –  Boody & Le1f
Hey (2014, XL/Terrible Records)
Blue Dream (2018, Self-released)


=== Mixtapes ===
Dark York (2012, Greedhead/Camp & Street)
Fly Zone (2013, Greedhead/Camp & Street)
Tree House (2013, Greedhead/Camp & Street)


== Filmography ==


=== Music videos ===


=== Television ===


== See also ==
LGBT culture in New York City
List of LGBT people from New York City


== References ==


== External links ==
Official site
Official Facebook
Official TwitterStephen Michael Feigenbaum, known professionally as Johan Lenox, is an American singer, composer and producer. His musical style combines elements of trap music, hip hop, pop and classical music. He began gaining attention for his production for high-profile artists like Travis Scott and Kanye West, among others. He released his first project in 2019, and has released three more since.


== Early life ==
Feigenbaum was raised in Massachusetts, where he spent summers studying classical music at Tanglewood in Lenox, Massachusetts. He spent six years at Yale University studying music. He was inspired upon hearing Kanye West's 2010 album, My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy, realizing the potential of combining classical music with modern pop and hip hop.


== Career ==


=== 2016-2018: "Yeethoven" ===
Feigenbaum developed his stage name combining the names of composer Johannes Brahms and the town of Lenox, Massachusetts, where he studied classical music. Feigenbaum began receiving attention in 2016, co-creating and arranging music for a live orchestra event called "Yeethoven", a project that combines and compares the works of Kanye West and Beethoven. This project captured the attention of Time, Pitchfork, The Atlantic and artists like Vic Mensa and producer Mike Dean. Impressed by the work, Dean invited Feigenbaum to help produce for several Kanye West projects in 2018, including Nas' Nasir and Teyana Taylor's The Album.


=== 2019-2022: Solo work, WDYWTBWYGU, and isomonstrosity ===
In the subsequent years, Feigenbaum released a series of three projects under Island Records; Everybody's Cool but Me in 2019, Cancel the Party in 2020, and World on Fire in 2021. The song "Deep Reverence" by Big Sean received a nomination for Best Rap Performance at the 63rd Annual Grammy Awards, bringing Feigenbaum his first Grammy nomination. His fourth project, which he dubbed his "debut album", was released independently in 2022 and is titled WDYWTBWYGU (an acronym of What Do You Want to Be When You Grow Up), and features KayCyy, Ant Clemons, Mr. Hudson, 070 Shake, among others. In mid-2022, he joined 070 Shake as the opener for her nationwide tour for her second studio album, You Can't Kill Me. At the end of the year he released the debut album from isomonstrosity, a collaborative group with Ellen Reid and Yuga Cohler, performed by International Contemporary Ensemble then chopped and rearranged with vocals added by artists including Danny Brown, Kacy Hill, and Empress Of. Released on the Brassland label, The FADER said it was "quite possibly the platonic ideal of a pandemic album."


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===
WDYWTBWYGU (2022)
isomonstrosity (2022) — Johan featured as group member alongside Ellen Reid and Yuga Cohler
JOHAN'S CHILDHOOD CHAMBER NOSTALGIA ALBUM (2023)


=== Mixtapes ===
Everybody's Cool but Me (2019)
Cancel the Party (2020)
World on Fire (2021)


=== Extended plays ===
Chamber Johan (2021)
Wilds (2017)


== External links ==
Official website


== References ==Coi Leray Collins (born May 11, 1997) is an American rapper and singer. She began posting music to SoundCloud and released her single "Huddy", along with her debut mixtape Everythingcoz in 2018. After signing a record deal with 1801 Records and Republic Records, Leray released her second mixtape, EC2 (2019), and her debut extended play, Now or Never (2020). In 2021, the Lil Durk-assisted remix of her single, "No More Parties", reached the top 40  on the Billboard Hot 100, and was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA).
In 2022, Leray released her debut studio album Trendsetter. The album's collaborative single with Nicki Minaj, "Blick Blick", also reached the top 40 of the Billboard Hot 100. Her 2022 song "Players" peaked in the top 10 of the Billboard Hot 100, and preceded her second studio album, Coi (2023). Her 2023 single "Baby Don't Hurt Me" (with David Guetta and Anne-Marie), reached the top 20 on the UK Singles Chart.


== Early life ==
Collins was born on May 11, 1997 in Boston, Massachusetts, and raised in Hackensack, New Jersey. She is the daughter of rapper and media mogul Benzino, and has five brothers. Leray's parents divorced after her father left The Source. She started making music at age 14. In 2011, inspired by her father, she started rapping and released her first songs under the name Coi Leray—"Bow Down", with her brother Taj, and "Rock Back"—via YouTube. However, both Leray and her brother stopped rapping shortly after. At age 16, Leray dropped out of high school and started working in sales.


== Career ==


=== 2018–2020: Career beginnings ===
After quitting her job, Leray released her debut single, a response to A Boogie wit da Hoodie's song "DTB" titled "G.A.N.", in 2018 through SoundCloud. Her breakout single, "Huddy", and her debut mixtape, Everythingcoz, were both released in 2018.In December 2018, she was included as a featured artist alongside LouGotCash on the track "Save the Day" by American rapper Ski Mask the Slump God and singer Jacquees from the soundtrack album for the 2018 film Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse. Her second mixtape, EC2, was released on January 18, 2019 through 1801 Records and Republic Records. She accompanied American rapper Trippie Redd on his Life's a Trip Tour in early 2019, and released the single "Good Days" in March 2019. She appeared as a featured artist on the song "Everything BoZ" by Trippie Redd from his second studio album, !. In April 2020, she released the single "Better Days" with American rapper Fetty Wap, and was featured on the remix of American actress Keke Palmer's single "Sticky" in May 2020. Leray released her debut extended play, Now or Never, in August 2020.


=== 2021–present: Trendsetter and Coi ===
Leray's single "No More Parties" was released in January 2021, and became her first song to appear on the Billboard Hot 100, peaking at number 26. A remix of the song featuring American rapper Lil Durk was released in February 2021, for which a music video was directed by Reel Goats and released the following month. "No More Parties" was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) in May 2021. Leray released the single "Big Purr (Prrdd)" in March 2021, featuring vocals from American rapper Pooh Shiesty, which debuted at number 69 on the Billboard Hot 100. She starred in the music video for American rapper Mooski's single "Track Star" in April 2021, and is starring in the Whistle series Coi Vs. as of April 2021. Also in April 2021, she made her television debut, performing "No More Parties" on The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon, and was featured on the remix of Pressa's song "Attachments".In May 2021, Leray released the single "Bout Me" and appeared as a featured artist on EarthGang's remix of their song "Options". A clip of her performing to a motionless, silent crowd at H-Town Memorial Day Mayhem in May 2021 went viral. The following month, another clip of her performing to an unresponsive crowd at Rolling Loud Miami went viral. She was featured on Rich the Kid's song "Boss Bitch" and the remix of YN Jay's song "Triple S", and released the song "At the Top", featuring Kodak Black and Mustard, in June 2021. She was included on the XXL Freshman Class of 2021 that same month. Her participation in the 2021 XXL Freshman Cypher was widely mocked across social media and by critics. Leray was nominated for Best Female Hip-Hop Artist and Best New Artist at the BET Awards 2021. She also appeared on the song "Ocean Prime" from Bfb Da Packman's debut album, Fat Niggas Need Love Too, in June 2021.In July 2021, Leray was featured on the remix of Sleepy Hallow's "2055", and appeared on the single "What U Want" with Lil Xxel and Tyga. She released the single "Okay Yeah!" in August 2021. In September 2021, she released the single "Twinnem" with a music video for the song. The song went viral on TikTok, and a remix of the song featuring DaBaby was released in November 2021. Also in September, she began touring as an opening act for Lil Baby's The Back Outside Tour alongside Lil Durk. She was featured on Lonr's song "Cuffin" from his mixtape Land of Nothing Real 2 in October 2021. At the 2021 BET Hip Hop Awards, she was nominated for Best New Hip Hop Artist.On March 18, 2022, Leray released a collaboration with Nicki Minaj "Blick Blick", which debuted and peaked at number 37 on the Billboard Hot 100. Leray released her debut studio album, Trendsetter, on April 8, 2022. It includes collaborations with Yung Bleu, Fivio Foreign, Young M.A, G Herbo, H.E.R., Nav, Polo G, Lil Tecca, and A Boogie wit da Hoodie, among others.In 2022, Leray released "Players", which became her first solo song to make Billboard's Hot 100 list, and first top 10 hit where it peaked at #9 in 2023. The song benefited from some remixes including a Jersey club remix from DJ Smallz 732.In January 2023, Leray collaborated on one of the songs of Tomorrow X Together's 5th mini album, The Name Chapter: Temptation, Happy Fools. On 6 April, Leray teamed up with David Guetta and Anne-Marie on the single "Baby Don't Hurt Me" which samples Haddaways's hit "What Is Love". The song peaked at number 48 on the Billboard Hot 100 and number 13 on the UK Singles Chart. She also collaborated on the track "Self Love" with Metro Boomin, included on the soundtrack of Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse. On 23 June 2023, Leray released her second studio album, Coi.


== Personal life ==
Leray has cited Missy Elliott, Lady Gaga, Avril Lavigne, Doja Cat, Bon Jovi, Chief Keef, Chris Brown, Slick Woods, and Jazzelle Zanaughtti as inspirations. In 2021, Leray received an honorary diploma from Montclair High School in Montclair, New Jersey. As of 2021, she lives in Los Angeles.


== Discography ==

Trendsetter (2022)
Coi (2023)


== Awards and nominations ==


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
 Media related to Coi Leray at Wikimedia Commons
Coi Leray at AllMusicAlrad Lewis (born May 10, 1977), also known as Boola, is an American hip-hop producer, composer and artist. Growing up in Hempstead, Long Island, Boola started his own rap group with kids in the neighborhood. After taking on production responsibilities for the group, Boola decided to concentrate on the production aspect of the music business and soon began working with artists signed to Warner and MCA.


== Music career ==
In 2002, after producing for Warner and MCA Records, Boola signed a deal with Roc-A-Fella records. For the next seven years, Boola produced for and worked with artists such as Beanie Sigel, Cam'ron, Kanye West, Nicole Wray, Ne-Yo, Nas and Jaheim. After the Roc-A-Fella split, Boola continued to produce expanding into TV and film placements including VH1's Basketball Wives and MTV's Making With The Band. In 2011, Boola released the "Produced By Boola" mixtape series which featured original material from Nas, Ne-Yo, Bun B and others.  Shortly after he began to pursue a career as an artist, and in November 2012 appeared on BET's 106 & Park, to premiere his video "Starting 5".  It featured Maffew Ragazino, Mickey Factz, Reek Da Villian, and Jon Connor (produced by Bink).Boola's latest project is a mixtape album No Better Time Than The Present and, along with "Starting 5", featured  the first single "Kim K".


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums (artist) ===
2012: No Better Time Than The Present (Mixtape Album)


=== Mixtapes (artist/producer) ===
2011: Cut from a Different Cloth
2011: Produced By Boola


=== Songs (producer) ===
2007: Beanie Sigel – H.H.E.H
2007 N.O.R.E – I'ma Get You
2006: Ne-Yo – I Ain't Gotta Tell You
2006: Jaheim – The Chosen One
2006: Cam'Ron – Something New
2005: Beanie Sigel – Flatline, Oh Daddy, Tales of a Hustler
2005: Nicole Wray – If I was Your Girlfriend
2005: Rell – Real Love
2005: Young Gunz – What We Gotta Do
2005: Lost Boyz – Lets Go, My Way
2004: Young Gunz – That's Right
2004: Jim Jones – Capo Status,Take. 1 Take 2, Final Take
2004: Diplomats – Duty Clap
2003: State Property – Temporary Relief, State Prop You Know Us
2003: GZA – Did Ya Say That


== References ==Rob Lewis is a record producer from the Bronx, New York who met D.J. Chuck Chillout, a legendary New York hip-hop D.J. and radio personality, and crew (Kool Chip, Deuces Wild and D.J. Funkmaster Flex) during the late 1980s / early 1990s and was asked to do pre-production on Chuck and Chip's album, "Rhythm is the Master".
Lewis being an unknown producer was introduced to D.J. Chuck Chillout by DJ Wildstyle from Co-Op City in the Bronx. Wildstyle suggested that Lewis create a radio promo for Chuck. A radio promo is a short musical segment giving props and promotion to the radio D.J. and these promos were very popular at the time. Lewis's promo, known as "Chuck Is Chillin', was revolutionary for that time as it was created using individual word samples taken from various records and strung together to create a new lyric line. This style of sampling has since been copied numerous times both in radio promos as well as complete songs.
Lewis went on to produce songs on Chuck Chillout and Cool Chip's album Rhythm is the Master and later produced the majority of songs for the Bronx artist known as Nine whose two albums, Nine Livez and Cloud 9, are widely sought-after. Lewis's production for Nine includes the songs "Whutcha Want?", "Any Emcee", "Lyin' King", and "Make or Take” (featuring Smoothe da Hustler), among others.


== References ==


== External links ==

Rob Lewis at AllMusic
Rob Lewis discography at Discogs
Rob Lewis discography at MusicBrainzJeffrey Michael Haynes (born December 28, 1977), better known by his stage name Mr. Lif, is an American rapper from Boston, Massachusetts. While being praised because of his political lyrics, he has released two studio albums on Definitive Jux and one on Bloodbot Tactical Enterprises. Mr. Lif is also a member of the hip hop group The Perceptionists with long-time friends and collaborators Akrobatik and DJ Fakts One.


== Early life ==
Haynes grew up in the neighborhood of Brighton, Boston, Massachusetts. After attending the Dedham private school Noble and Greenough School, he went on to attend Colgate University for two years, and he eventually dropped out. He became a performer in 1994. Mr. Lif's family ancestry is Bajan.
Haynes adopted the stage name "Mr. Lif" after ingesting psilocybin mushrooms at an outdoor Phish concert during his freshman year at Colgate University in 1994. He imagined a fictional character called The Liftedly Man while under the influence, which gave way to "Mr. Lif". He later said in an interview for the Times Colonist: "I don't know any Phish songs. I went to the show, and I still don't know anything about them now."


== Career ==
Influenced by legendary MC's like Chuck D, KRS-One, and Rakim, Mr. Lif began releasing singles in the late '90s, when party rap and gangsta rap were the dominant styles for hip hop music, but Mr. Lif's lyrical agenda was a political and socially conscious one. Mr. Lif released his first single, Elektro, in 1998, attracting the attention of labels Grand Royal and Definitive Jux. Working closely with producer and Definitive Jux label head El-P, Lif released a series of critically acclaimed singles and EPs, starting with Enters the Colossus in 2000. In 2000 and 2001, he won the Boston Music Award for Outstanding Rap/Hip Hop Act. Touring kept him busy for the next year, but he still found time to release the Cro-Magnon single and a live CD. His track "Pull Out Your Cut" was featured in the soundtrack to the ESPN Video Game ESPN NFL 2K5.
In 2002, Mr. Lif released a pair of concept releases. The Emergency Rations EP bookended collaborations with Edan and Akrobatik in an MC abduction scenario, while the I Phantom full-length formed a saga that led him from birth to apocalypse. He revisited his Akrobatik collaboration in 2005, when the pair joined producer DJ Fakts One to form The Perceptionists, who released Black Dialogue, also on Definitive Jux. One year later, he returned with Mo' Mega, his follow-up to I Phantom, featuring eight productions from El-P and features from Murs, Aesop Rock, and Blueprint. Mr. Lif has also collaborated with Otis Grove, Thievery Corporation and Anomie Belle.I Heard It Today was released on Bloodbot Tactical Enterprises in 2009. Mr Lif embraced I Heard It Today using the album as a tool to address various political issues affecting people all over the world. I Heard It Today is the third full-length studio album by Mr. Lif. The album was released on April 21, 2009, on Mr. Lif's own label Bloodbot Tactical Enterprises. Mr. Lif has stated that the album is "dedicated to capturing the pulse of this tumultuous era we're living through."
In June 2014, Mr. Lif announced on his Facebook that he is working on an album with The Polish Ambassador that will be released in the fall. In September 2014, the pair embarked on a national 5-week Permaculture Action tour with fellow musicians Ayla Nereo and Liminus. The musicians performed 4–5 days a week and then participated in weekly "Permaculture Action Days" where they held permaculture themed events and activities within the communities they were visiting. The tour raised over $40,000.Lif is also a vocalist for Thievery Corporation and a member of the band's live performance group. In 2011, Lif recorded the title track to their 2012 album, "Culture of Fear". He continues to tour with the band today. Lif also appears on 2017 album "The Temple Of I & I", performing two tracks – the single "Ghetto Matrix" and "Fight To Survive", and on 2 further tracks from the 2018 album "Treasures from the Temple", "History and "Joy Ride". 


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===
I Phantom (Definitive Jux, 2002)
Mo' Mega (Definitive Jux, 2006)
I Heard It Today (Bloodbot Tactical Enterprises, 2009)
Don't Look Down (Mello Music Group, 2016)


=== EPs ===
Enters the Colossus (Definitive Jux, 2000)
Emergency Rations (Definitive Jux, 2002)


=== Collaborations ===
Black Dialogue (Definitive Jux, 2005) – with Akrobatik and DJ Fakts One as The Perceptionists
The Life & Death of Scenery (Mello Music Group, 2016) – with L'Orange
Terra Bella The Polish Ambassador, Mr. Lif, Ayla Nereo (2016)
Resilient w/ Brass Menazeri (2017)
Vangarde (Fat Beats Records, 2020) – with Stu Bangas


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Mr. Lif discography at Discogs
Mr. Lif interview at PitchforkGabriel Stevenson, professionally known as Like, is an American record producer, rapper, DJ and songwriter. A three time Grammy nominee, he began working with the Pacific Division, a hip hop trio, better known as Pac Div in 2006.
In 2012, he produced Kendrick Lamar's "Sing About Me" on Good Kid, M.A.A.D City. He received two Grammy Award nominations at the 56th Grammy Awards: Album of the Year and Best Rap Album. In 2016, he produced Anderson .Paak's "Room in Here" featuring The Game and Sonyae Elise on the Malibu album. The album received a Grammy nomination for Best Urban Contemporary Album at the 59th Annual Grammy Awards. Like has production credit with artists such as Mac Miller, Ab-Soul, Joey Badass, Nick Grant, Asher Roth, Ill Camille and Currensy.
Like has released music as a solo artist. He released instrumental albums, Zesty and Lightwork in 2014 and Emeralds in 2016. On September 30, 2016, he released his first solo rap album, Songs Made While High, which features Anderson .Paak, Buddy, and Kali Uchis.
In 2017, Pac Div regrouped and are scheduled to release an album at the end of the year.


== Discography ==


=== Instrumental / solo projects ===
All Songs produced by Like


=== Pac Div studio albums ===


=== Pac Div mixtapes ===


=== Pac Div EPs ===


=== Production credits ===


=== Guest appearances ===
List of features with other performing artists, showing year released and album name


== Nominations and awards ==


=== Grammy Awards ===
The Grammy Awards are awarded annually by the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences of the United States. Like has received three nomination.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Like AllMusic Page
Like Discogs PageDavid Andrew Burd (born March 15, 1988), better known by his stage name Lil Dicky, is an American rapper, comedian, and actor. He came to prominence with the release of the music video for his song "Ex-Boyfriend" in 2013, which became popular with more than one million views on YouTube in 24 hours. He released his debut album, Professional Rapper, in 2015.
In 2018, his song "Freaky Friday", featuring Chris Brown, became a worldwide hit. He also gained attention for his 2019 music video "Earth", which featured many singers and actors including Ariana Grande, Justin Bieber, Ed Sheeran, Shawn Mendes, Kevin Hart, Wiz Khalifa, Charlie Puth, Katy Perry, and Leonardo DiCaprio. The song was made to raise awareness about the environment, pollution, and climate change. Burd stated that a portion of the song's proceeds are being donated to a variety of environmental charities.In 2020, Burd and producer Jeff Schaffer created a television comedy series based on Burd's life called Dave, which premiered on FXX in March 2020. The show's second season aired in 2021 and its third season premiered on April 5, 2023.


== Early life ==
Burd was born in Cheltenham Township on the north border of Philadelphia and grew up in an upper-middle-class Jewish family in the Elkins Park neighborhood. He was born with "a tangled urethra" and hypospadias, in which the urethra does not open from its usual location in the head of the penis, requiring multiple surgeries.Burd's interest in music started when he was a child, listening to hip hop and alternative rock. He began rapping in the fifth grade after doing a history report on Alexander Pushkin using rap music. In his youth, the rappers Burd listened to most were Nas and Jay-Z.Burd attended Cheltenham High School. Speaking about his time in high school, Burd said "I was a pussy. I was really awkward looking. I wasn't getting any girls at all, but I was very class-clownish and I got good grades." After graduating from high school, Burd began attending the University of Richmond, where fellow 2016 XXL Freshman and rapper Dave East also attended at the same time. Burd graduated summa cum laude in 2010.After college, Burd relocated to San Francisco, California where he worked in account management at the advertising agency Goodby, Silverstein & Partners. After reimagining his monthly progress report as a rap video, the company brought him to work in their creative department, where he wrote copy for ads such as the NBA's "BIG" campaign.


== Career ==
Burd says he initiated his rap career "simply to get attention comedically, so [he] could write movies, write TV shows and act". However, he "fell in love with rapping" and says he's "not leaving that game until [he's] proved [his] point".Burd began working on his debut mixtape, So Hard, in 2011. The mixtape took Burd over two years to finish because he still had his day job at Goodby, Silverstein & Partners during its development. Burd recorded a majority of his early material for So Hard on his MacBook Pro and a $400 microphone; in 2013 he began releasing one song per week for five months straight. On April 23, 2013, Burd released the music video for his song "Ex-Boyfriend", the mixtape's leading single. The music video received one million views within 24 hours of being posted on YouTube. Burd released a new song or music video, in a series titled Hump Days. Following the release of 32 songs and 15 music videos, Burd launched a Kickstarter, stating, "I've officially run out of money... In a nutshell, you are funding phase two of my rap career." The month-long crowdfunding period began on November 20, 2013, with the goal of raising $70,000 in order to enable Burd to create and produce more music, music videos, and go touring. The Kickstarter well exceeded its target, raising $113,000.Burd held his first live concert at TLA in Philadelphia on February 19, 2014. Burd signed with CMSN, which also manages Tyga and Chiddy Bang. He plans on "having two concurrent careers going on, as a rapper, and as a comedian/actor/writer". Burd released his debut album Professional Rapper on July 31, 2015, and features artists Snoop Dogg, T-Pain, Rich Homie Quan, Fetty Wap, Brendon Urie (Panic! at the Disco), RetroJace and Hannibal Buress. Burd appeared in a 2016 Funny or Die video "Watch Yo Self" with Mystikal and Trinidad James. On June 13, 2016, XXL Magazine released the 2016 Freshmen line-up. It included Burd, along with Anderson .Paak, Kodak Black, Lil Uzi Vert, 21 Savage, Dave East, Denzel Curry, Desiigner, G Herbo, and Lil Yachty.
On April 12, 2017, Burd released a music video for "Pillow Talking". Its special effects made it the 49th most expensive music video ever created. In an interview with XXL in April 2017, Burd mentioned that he was creating a new project and that he was also attempting to pitch a TV show to networks. In September 2017, Burd released an EP under his alter ego Brain, I'm Brain. On March 15, 2018, Burd released a new single, "Freaky Friday", featuring Chris Brown, and the associated music video. By April 9, 2018, the video had reached over 100 million views and topped the charts in New Zealand and the United Kingdom. On April 2, 2018, Burd announced his first Australian tour; he previously studied abroad for two years in Melbourne.On April 19, 2019, Burd released a single called "Earth", featuring artists such as Ariana Grande, Justin Bieber, Ed Sheeran, and Shawn Mendes. They all voice various animated organisms in the music video. The music video, which was created in partnership with the Leonardo DiCaprio Foundation, aimed at encouraging better environmental practices worldwide. Upon release Burd referred to the project as "the most important thing [he'll] ever do."Burd and Jeff Schafer created a TV series called Dave, which portrays a fictionalized version of Burd's life as a rapper. It stars Burd, Taylor Misiak, and Christine Ko. The show premiered on March 4, 2020, on FXX. On May 11, 2020, Dave was renewed for a second season, which aired in 2021. On June 20, 2023, Burd announced that he will release a soundtrack album for Dave later this summer.


== Musical style and influences ==
Burd's style blends the comical with the relatable. According to Boston magazine, "Content-wise, Burd comes up with his material from everyday occurrences and everyday experiences. From there, he crafts his videos around those topics to create a visual narrative that accompanies his talent as an emcee. 'It's like a comedian. They are out in the world, and writing things down,' he said. What followed 'Ex-Boyfriend' was a series of other videos that covered similarly average everyday experiences—songs about staying in for the night, songs about being a Jewish kid—he also has a rap battle with Adolf Hitler in one of his videos."Burd describes his style as a response to the excessive egotistical nature of rap today: "I really wanted to embody the exact opposite of that, and I think people are appreciating it. There just hasn't been a voice for that normal dude when it comes to rap." He added, "I think a lot of rap is just escalated to a place that many people can't relate to... My niche is that I'm relatable. I don't rap about going to the club and popping bottles." In terms of his rapping skills, Burd is able "to manipulate words at an excessive speed, and weave rhyme patterns together in a way that's funny while also making viewers want to rewind parts of his videos".Burd says his musical inspirations are J. Cole, A$AP Rocky, Snoop Dogg, as well as Childish Gambino, whom he refers to as "a guy with similar aspirations."


== Discography ==

Professional Rapper (2015)


== Filmography ==


== Tours ==


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website
Lil Dicky on SoundCloud
Lil Dicky on YouTubeNiatia Jessica Kirkland (born October 4, 1989), better known by her stage name Lil Mama, is an American rapper and actress. She experienced top 10 Billboard placements at 17 with her debut album VYP (Voice of the Young People) (2008), which debuted at number 25 on the Billboard 200. The album spawned her four major singles including her staple song and dance anthem "Lip Gloss", earning her two Teen Choice Awards and Monster Single of the Year nominations at the MTV Video Music Awards. Kirkland gained further attention in pop music after a collaboration with Avril Lavigne for the remix of her hit single "Girlfriend".
Kirkland took a hiatus from music after success of her hit single "Hustler Girl" to stay focused on serving as a judge for total of seven seasons on MTV's America's Best Dance Crew at the age of 19 from 2008 to 2012, which made her one of the youngest judges on any competitive television series in history. Working with producer and fellow judge Randy Jackson, she served alongside JC Chasez, Shane Sparks, Mario Lopez, and Layla Kayleigh.
She was cast in her breakout role of Lisa "Left Eye" Lopes in the VH1 biographical film CrazySexyCool: The TLC Story, which aired in October 2013 and garnered 4.5 million views in the first night. From the success of the film, Kirkland joined TLC on their tour for their last album. She got the opportunity to perform a tribute to Lopes at the 2013 American Music Awards performing the Grammy Award-winning song "Waterfalls".
Kirkland continued to remain in the public eye, returning to music, making new tracks with fellow rapper MC Lyte on her single "Ball". She made Billboard history again with her song "Sausage" at the BET Awards. She appeared on multiple magazine covers and was back in television with Growing Up Hip Hop: Atlanta. In 2019, she starred in the film All In, alongside Traci Braxton.


== Early life ==
Niatia Jessica Kirkland was born on October 4, 1989, in Brooklyn, New York City, and is the eldest daughter of eight children. She was raised in Harlem from her kindergarten to her eighth-grade year. She moved back to Brooklyn and attended Edward R. Murrow High School until her senior year where she continued her education through independent studies. Kirkland is a third generation of West African, Trinidadian, and Jamaican descent and the third born child. Being the oldest daughter, she got her nickname "Lil Mama". She has two older brothers and three younger brothers, one of whom is also a dancer and underground rapper along with her younger sister and last brother. She has one maternal aunt and several paternal uncles.
Kirkland faced personal and financial struggles at an early age and experienced even more poverty when her mother, Tara, was diagnosed with breast cancer, which often led Kirkland to struggle in school as she had to care for her siblings and see her mother back and forth in hospitals from procedures. Both her parents had separated when she was a young child, but Kirkland always maintained a close relationship with her father, visiting him consistently. Her family became homeless and their mother had moved her and her siblings into a shelter due to poverty at the time. Kirkland told Power 105.1 she stayed in the shelters for seven years from her kindergarten year until the beginning of her eighth-grade year when they managed to get an apartment in the Bronx and gain more stability. Her younger sibling's father was deceased, so her mother was the matriarch of her family. She contributed to helping her mother financially by taking up small jobs such as baking. Growing up, Kirkland witnessed many hardships in her community including gang and drug violence, teen pregnancy, and domestic violence.
After her mother's fight with cancer became terminal, her mother moved in with Kirkland's aunt and Tara's older sister. She stayed there so she could be cared for and help with the care of the younger children in her family.
As one of eight children, she began to express herself artistically by writing poetry and music. She trained at dance schools for ballet, jazz dance, tap dance, South African dance, hip hop dance, and street dance; she was in many competitions and recitals making her a professional dancer. She was influenced by MC Lyte, Lil' Kim, Lisa Lopes, Missy Elliott, Lauryn Hill, and her parents. Her mother was a talented singer and her father Allen Brunner was a musician and DJ. Kirkland decided to explore her talents further when she took interest in the rap culture, and from then on she continued to perfect her talent in rapping and managed to become an avid free-stylist.


== Career ==


=== 2006–2012: VYP (Voice of the Young People) and turmoil ===
Kirkland became known as the "Voice of the Young People" for being a teen sensation and connecting with her younger fans as she continued to present herself as that and embrace it in her music videos and songs. She became the "Queen of Hip-Pop" for mixing her rhymes with pop influences, which started after her collaboration with Avril Lavigne. She first introduced herself as the "Birth of Hip-Pop" at the 2007 MTV Video Music Awards sporting a baby-styled look. She later told MTV how she intended to spread and influence more artists to spread the genre of hip-pop. After her 2009 re-release of her single "L.I.F.E.", Kirkland introduced her fans to a whole new side of the darker reality that young people face. The song was followed by a music video that incorporated the themes of the song which included teen pregnancy, drug addiction, child abandonment, domestic violence, and more. This showed Kirkland as a legitimate rapper for even adults to listen to.Since the release of her first album, Kirkland has been in and out of studios making new music. She released the single "Doughboy" (featuring Mishon). After that release she made appearances on tracks with other artists, including "Turn It Up" by Mishon and "Sexiest" by Yahaira. She also released "On & On & On" and "NY NY LA LA" (featuring Snoop Dogg). The two singles were intended to be a part of her second studio album, but instead they were released on iTunes and digital download but were later removed for unknown reasons. She then released two more singles entitled "Scrawberry" and "Hustler Girl", both singles were followed by music videos. "Scrawberry" introduced a new look for Kirkland, in which she would wear colorful wigs and futuristic attire; this would be her new style for next few years; however, the song was released on her MySpace page and YouTube, it was unclear if it was removed from streaming services along with her other two singles. "Hustler Girl" garnered $1.5 million which topped the income she received from her Billboard hits "Shawty Get Loose" and "Lip Gloss", which earned her $1 million and $800,000. Her next collaboration to follow, "Billionaire" by Prince Malik, would earn her $1.8 million.
Kirkland was featured on Lil Wayne's "A Milli"; she was brought on stage at his concerts to perform the song. Kirkland was  featured in the Grammy Award-nominated album First Love by Karina Pasian, a close friend to Kirkland and a veteran music artist. In 2009, she announced the title of her proposed sophomore album as Voice of the Young People: I Am That after her single "What It Is (Strike a Pose)" failed to chart. The song was the last single with a music video to be added to her album and was used to commercialize the album. The song failed to chart.
On October 7, 2012, RCA Music Group announced it was disbanding J Records along with Arista Records and Jive Records. With the shutdown, Kirkland (and all other artists previously signed to these three labels) would release future material on the RCA Records brand. However, Kirkland had left Jive before the transition to RCA; she stated in an interview that she was not in the right space to make music and decided to take a hiatus. Voice of the Young People: I Am That would have had guest appearances including Soulja Boy, Khalil, Angel Haze, LoLa Monroe, Teyana Taylor, Trina, Keke Palmer, Nas, and Chris Brown, among others. Due to her leaving Jive, the album never saw a release and instead it along with the few singles recorded with Zomba Records were shelved, but she managed to release some the songs directly online for her fans which included "Scrawberry", "On & On & On", and "NY NY LA LA". The other singles she planned to record with the featured artist were never recorded and were disbanded. After leaving Jive, Kirkland became an independent artist.
On June 13, 2012, America's Best Dance Crew came to a series finale. Kirkland had served as a judge for a total of seven seasons. The following year, she released a single titled "Bad as Me" on  Myspace and YouTube.


=== 2013–2017: CrazySexyCool: The TLC Story, "Sausage", Take Me Back, and When Love Kills: The Falicia Blakely Story ===
In October 2013, Kirkland starred as Lisa "Left Eye" Lopes in the VH1 biographical film CrazySexyCool: The TLC Story, which aired on October 21, 2013, alongside Keke Palmer and Drew Sidora, who played Rozonda "Chilli" Thomas and Tionne "T-Boz" Watkins, respectively. The film generated 4.5 million views in one night. This was her first acting debut and breakout role, in which she received positive feedback from Lopes' fans. Kirkland was the first to be cast and from both the success of the film and the close relationship she formed with Watkins and Thomas. TLC took a chance on Kirkland, allowing her to substitute for Lopes. TLC took Kirkland on tour, and Kirkland carried out Lopes' legacy by rapping her verses. Kirkland's journey with TLC came to end after they performed at the 2013 American Music Awards. Kirkland and TLC dedicated a performance of "Waterfalls" to Lopes. After the tribute, Kirkland and TLC parted ways, and Kirkland went on to return to making music.
In November 2014, Kirkland and AV were featured on MC Lyte's song "Ball" from her album Legend. The music video was released on November 13, 2014. Kirkland appeared in the video with both artists, providing rap verses, along with some of her signature dance moves. That same year, she performed the song live with AV and MC Lyte on The Real.In May 2015, Kirkland released the video for her song "Sausage" on WorldStarHipHop. The song was inspired by the #SausageMovement on Vine after Kirkland heard two girls on a street corner following the trend. The video incorporates many themes including Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles, voguing, Mary J. Blige, Caribbean love, and community fun. It immediately went viral, with more than 3 million views in its first week, topping the Billboard + Twitter Top Tracks charts, passing Maroon 5's "Sugar" and knocking out Jason Derulo's "Want to Want Me". It held itself steady in the top 20 well into June, with numerous dance studio and dance jams featuring choreography and routines on social media danced to the track.Kirkland got a chance to perform the song live during half time of the 2015 BET Hip Hop Awards. The track was not made available for sale, being absent from both iTunes and Amazon Music due to copyright issues; the track was only available on Kirkland's SoundCloud account and her website. The video also opted out of advertising revenue on YouTube, with no advertisements appearing before the music video. The following year, she released another single "Memes" as a response to memes made of her after her notorious interview on The Breakfast Club. Kirkland released Take Me Back, a mixtape which featured "Sausage" and "Memes". The mixtape was later up for sale on her website and SoundCloud account, it featured seven songs including a cover and re-edition of Rihanna's "Work". The song received mixed reviews online both on YouTube and her website. People were not fond of her vocals on the hook, but adored her choreography. The last song to be added was "Too Fly", which caught less attraction after her website was taken down for unknown reasons. The music video was filmed at a club featuring her younger brother Arnstar as one of the dancers. She also produced her singing vocals on the hook. The song was also another copyright issue that couldn't be made for sale and solely released through her mixtape and her SoundCloud account. The music video is a YouTube exclusive.
After her acting debut, Kirkland made what SOHH called an "epic comeback". Kirkland was back on red carpets, award shows, talk shows, and magazine covers. In 2016, Kirkland made an appearance on Hip Hop Squares as a contestant; the episode was highlighted because of the controversy Tamar Braxton started with the host. That same year, Kirkland, alongside Dej Loaf, gave a tribute to Lil' Kim at VH1's Hip Hop Honors, Lil' Kim later thanked Kirkland with a post of the tribute on her Instagram account.
In June 2015, Kirkland was listed as a featured speaker at an event sponsored by BET and the Hip Hop Sisters Network. Titled "Women, Wealth and Relationships", the event also featured guest speakers MC Lyte, Shanice, and Elise Neal, as well as main speaker and financial advisor specialist Lynn Richardson. The event, held on June 27, 2015, focuses on empowering black women both in their lives and financially, providing answers on such tough issues as men, money, and family relationships.
On August 28, 2017, Kirkland returned to acting, starring in the television film When Love Kills: The Falicia Blakely Story, based on a true story. It premiered to 1.6 million viewers, ranking as TV One's #1 original movie premiere of all time among all key demos. Kirkland, along with director Tasha Smith and her co-stars Tami Roman and Lance Gross, went on a tour to promote the film and share Falicia Blakely's story.


=== 2018–present: "Shoe Game" and Growing Up Hip Hop: Atlanta ===
On April 17, 2018, Kirkland became competitor on MTV's The Challenge: Champs vs. Stars, a competitive television miniseries in which celebrities would team up with pro-athlete champions against each other. There, she met Drake Bell, and the two would later go on to collaborate on his track "Call Me When You're Lonely".
On May 3, 2018, Kirkland released a single titled "Shoe Game". The single was available everywhere online for sale, streaming, and digital download. The single was later followed by a music video, directed by Walu, on May 25, 2018. It became a YouTube exclusive, following a million and twenty thousand views within five months. Kirkland went on to promote the single on the morning edition of Total Request Live in late September informing that this will lead to a future album. She was then followed up by Brynn Elliott after discussion of her old album and viewing of her greatest music videos which included "Lip Gloss", "Shawty Get Loose", and "G-Slide (Tour Bus)".
On September 9, 2018, Kirkland was a presenter for the 2018 BET special Black Girls Rock!; she had the privilege to work with artists such as Queen Latifah, Janet Jackson, Mary J. Blige, etc. She presented the award to Shanay Thompson for her M.A.D. Girls celebrated by Coca-Cola. On September 25, 2018, Entertainment Tonight announced that Kirkland would join the cast of The CW's All American as a supporting character; this would be her first acting role since When Love Kills: The Falicia Blakely Story.
On October 4, 2018, Kirkland appeared on TV One's morning talk show Sister Circle to discuss her latest single "Shoe Game", and her being cast on Growing Up Hip Hop: Atlanta. There, she stated that she will be joining the cast as a regular due to her move to Atlanta, Georgia, to work on her upcoming album that Bow Wow will be assisting to co-produce and allow the series to document her journey as well as her experiences. She also got to discuss her acting career, as well as her taking vocal lessons from R&B singer Kelly Price; her singing will debut on the intended album.
On October 18, 2018, Growing Up Hip Hop: Atlanta premiered for the continuation of its second season. Kirkland made her debut on the first episode alongside Kiyomi Leslie and Masika Kalysha as replacement for cast members who quit. Kirkland stars alongside her mentor and new manager MC Lyte. On November 14, 2018, Kirkland made her debut appearance on All American in its fifth episode. She introduced her character, Chynna Q, an upcoming hip hop artist.
On June 13, 2019, she starred in the film All In, alongside Traci Braxton.


== Personal life ==
Kirkland's mother, Tara, died on December 15, 2007, following a four-year battle with breast cancer. Kirkland's music video for "Shawty Get Loose" was dedicated to her memory; the single won her a Teen Choice Award. Tara also happened to be featured in the intro and closing of Kirkland's music video for her hit single "Lip Gloss". Kirkland had taken over guardianship over her younger siblings along with the help of her family and older brothers. She spoke about this at the red carpet for MTV. Kirkland has stated she and her mother had a close relationship and her mother relied on her for the help in raising her younger siblings.
Kirkland is the older sister of underground rapper and dancer Arnstar, who was a regular on MTV's Wild 'n Out. He is also dancer in the New York City street dancing crew W.A.F.F.L.E. Their crew garnered more recognition after making their appearance on The Ellen DeGeneres Show and received a cash reward from DeGeneres herself.


== Controversies ==
At the 2009 MTV Video Music Awards, Kirkland came onstage while Jay-Z and Alicia Keys performed "Empire State of Mind". While Jay-Z was ending his final verse, Kirkland left her seat in the audience, got onto the stage, and started bobbing her head to the beat. Jay-Z was surprised, but continued to perform. Right before this moment, Beyoncé had tried to hold her from going up. Jay-Z patted Kirkland on the leg to fall back, jokingly telling her, "you T-Paining now," a reference to a similar incident two months earlier when T-Pain jumped on stage with Jay-Z at Summer Jam during his performance of "D.O.A. (Death of Auto-Tune)". At the end of the performance, Kirkland came to foreground and posed alongside Jay-Z and Keys. She later clarified that she "would never ... try to disrespect Jay-Z or take a moment that someone has created it and try to relive it. I'm too original for that and I respect him too much for that." In October 2009, she appeared in cycle 13 of America's Next Top Model with Benny Ninja.
On August 11, 2011, Kirkland was a guest on The Breakfast Club. While on the air, tensions rose between her and fellow DJ Charlamagne tha God as they exchanged jabs, with Charlamagne bringing up her VMAs incident and the controversy between her and Nicki Minaj. Two more DJs, Angela Yee and DJ Envy, chimed in, discussing her absence from music at the time. After some time, Kirkland broke down in tears when her mother's passing was brought up. Kirkland crying spawned numerous memes around the internet. Five years later, Kirkland returned to The Breakfast Club to explain why she cried, and the DJs and Kirkland exchanged apologies with one another.
On March 10, 2016, Kirkland was arrested for driving 38 mph in a 25 mph speed zone with a revoked license. The incident took place in Harlem at around 4 a.m. Officers conducted an investigation and Kirkland's driver's license was revoked. She went on to make a statement apologizing to her family, friends, and fans.Bow Wow set Kirkland on blind date with his friend BT, a radio personality, in December 2018, and caused controversy by allegedly saying that "Y'all gonna be f**king in a week." This was aired on their series Growing Up Hip Hop: Atlanta, and Kirkland posted on Instagram to address the episode, calling out Bow Wow and his girlfriend.


== Discography ==

Studio albumsVYP (Voice of the Young People) (2008)


== Filmography ==


=== Television ===


== Awards and nominations ==


=== BET Awards ===


=== MTV Video Music Awards ===


=== MTV Asia Awards ===


=== Teen Choice Awards ===


=== Vibe Awards ===


== References ==


== External links ==

Lil Mama at IMDbGustav Elijah Åhr (Swedish pronunciation: [ˈoːr]; November 1, 1996 – November 15, 2017), known professionally as Lil Peep, was an American rapper and singer-songwriter. He was a member of the emo rap collective GothBoiClique. Helping pioneer an emo revival-style of rap and rock music, Lil Peep has been credited as a leading figure of the mid–late 2010s emo rap scene and came to be an inspiration to outcasts and youth subcultures.Born in Allentown, Pennsylvania, to an American mother and a Swedish father and raised on Long Island, Åhr started releasing music on SoundCloud in 2013 under the name "Trap Goose", later changing his artist name to Lil Peep because his mother had called him "Peep" since he was a baby. He soon became popular on the platform with the release of his 2015 single "Star Shopping", and his popularity grew further with his release of mixtapes Lil Peep; Part One and Live Forever later that year. In 2016, Lil Peep released his widely acclaimed mixtapes Crybaby and Hellboy, along with many other projects including California Girls and Vertigo.
Lil Peep's first live performance was February 12, 2016, in Tucson as member of Schemaposse. Later that year, he toured briefly with Fat Nick, Mikey The Magician, and Smokepurpp. In the spring of 2017, Lil Peep embarked on his first solo tour, performing to packed venues in three Russian cities, making his way across western Europe, and then across the United States. Soon after the tour Lil Peep moved to London, where he recorded his EP Goth Angel Sinner, and in August he released his debut studio album, Come Over When You're Sober, Pt. 1.While his mixtapes explored emo, trap, lo-fi and alternative rock, his debut album was a transition into pop punk and rap rock. His second album, Come Over When You're Sober, Pt. 2, was released in 2018 and debuted at number four on the Billboard 200. A documentary film about him, Everybody's Everything, was released in 2019.
On November 15, 2017, two weeks after his 21st birthday, Lil Peep died on his tour bus before a scheduled performance in Tucson, his second to last scheduled show on a 33-date tour of the United States. The Pima County medical examiner's office, which conducted toxicology tests on Lil Peep, ruled his cause of death an accidental overdose of fentanyl, a powerful opioid, and Xanax, a benzodiazepine sedative. His death was observed as a great loss to 21st-century music. "He could have been his generation's Kurt Cobain", a Rolling Stone profile stated.


== Early life and education ==
Gustav Elijah Åhr was born on November 1, 1996, in Allentown, Pennsylvania, the second child of first grade teacher Liza Womack. His maternal grandfather is John Womack, a former Harvard University professor of Latin American history and economics and a specialist on Emiliano Zapata, a leader of the early 20th century Mexican Revolution.He moved to Long Beach, New York on Long Island before his fifth birthday. He had one sibling, Karl "Oskar" Åhr. His parents were both Harvard graduates. His mother's family is from Oklahoma and his father is Swedish. Åhr's Swedish citizenship was granted to him through his father in accordance with Swedish law which states that Swedish citizenship is granted automatically at birth to anyone with at least one Swedish parent.Åhr's parents separated in 2012 when he was 15. He began experiencing anxiety around age 16 and, according to his mother, self-medicated with marijuana and Xanax. Lil Peep had a close relationship with his mother, going so far as to tattoo her initials and birthday on his arm as his first tattoo at the age of 14. Following his parents' split, he moved with his mother and older brother to Long Beach, New York, where he would eventually record "Lil Peep; Part One", Feelz, Vertigo, most of "California Girls," "Garden," "In the Bedroom I Confess," "Mall Music," "Romeo's Regrets," and several tracks that were released as singles, including "Star Shopping".
Åhr attended Lindell Elementary School, located just across the street from his mother's apartment in Long Beach. Just a few days into Åhr's kindergarten year, the September 11 attacks took place with smoke plumes clearly visible from Åhr's kindergarten classroom. In third grade, Åhr was placed in Long Beach's gifted and talented program. Later, in middle school, he was placed in accelerated classes. He played the trombone and tuba and expressed an interest in music and fashion from a young age. Åhr attended Long Beach High School in Lido Beach, New York, which was directly impacted by Hurricane Sandy in 2012 and caused the school to close for a few weeks. When the school reopened, the faculty and administrators were more relaxed on the students, leading Åhr to enjoy his junior year of high school significantly more than the rest.
When Åhr returned to school the following year as a senior, there was a new administration that was unfamiliar with the student body and culture. An exhausted Åhr was ready to drop out, but was assisted by a teacher named Maria Hartmann to finish school. With the help of two other teachers whom Åhr knew and trusted, Åhr finished high school by completing his last two necessary courses, English and Social Studies. He graduated six months early in January 2014.
Later that January, Åhr was accepted into SUNY Old Westbury on Long Island, but declined to attend and instead enrolled as an out of state student at Glendale Community College in Pasadena, California. There, he was able to enroll in one class with a middle school friend, who ultimately dropped out. After his first semester at Glendale Community College, Åhr decided to drop out and instead enrolled at Nassau Community College on Long Island. By the fall of 2015, Åhr was taking four classes online (two business classes, one criminal justice class, and one art history class) in which he earned three A's and one B.
During Åhr's only full-time semester at Nassau Community College, he made the dean's list. However, instead of enrolling in a second term, Åhr decided to drop out and begin performing with Schemaposse. By the end of 2015 he had already completed a large body of work in his bedroom while attending school full-time.At the age of 18, Åhr got his first face tattoo, a broken heart below his left eye, as a sign of commitment to avoiding a straight life. "A tattoo on your face is gonna stop you from getting a lot of jobs," he would later say. He returned to Los Angeles to pursue a career in music under the stage name Lil Peep in February 2016. He moved to Los Angeles, he later explained, because living on Long Island depressed him.


== Career ==
When Lil Peep was a teenager, he was self-described as a loner who made most of his friends online. Inspired by underground acts like Seshollowaterboyz and iLoveMakonnen, Peep made music while residing on Long Island under the pseudonym "Trap Goose" and lived temporarily with childhood friend Brennan Savage until both decided to move to Los Angeles.In Los Angeles, Lil Peep initially lived in Skid Row and dipped in and out of homelessness, staying at Savage's apartment while Savage pursued a degree. The two eventually went separate ways, and Peep met Atlanta rapper and producer JGRXXN, Florida rapper Ghostemane and Houston rapper Craig Xen, living with them while forming the collective Schemaposse. He originally met Craig Xen online and was introduced to JGRXXN, who needed a singer. Lil Peep also attended Glendale Community College during his first year in Los Angeles.In 2015, Peep released his first extended play, Feelz. This was followed by his debut mixtape Lil Peep; Part One, which generated 4,000 plays in its first week. Shortly thereafter, he released a follow-up mixtape, Live Forever.Lil Peep began to grow in popularity in the fall of 2015, garnered by the popularity of songs such as "Star Shopping" (later released as a single posthumously) making waves in underground hip-hop circles. Lil Peep's popularity continued to rise after the release of the song "Beamer Boy", which led to him performing live for the first time with the rest of Schemaposse in February 2016 in Tucson, Arizona. In April, Schemaposse broke up and Lil Peep was no longer associated with a collective, though they remained on good terms. Shortly after Schemaposse's breakup, Peep began to associate with Los Angeles-based rap collective GothBoiClique, featuring members of the group on his full-length mixtape Crybaby. The group shared a squat in Skid Row with Peep and often shared beds. Crybaby was recorded over the span of one month and was completed hours before its original release on SoundCloud in June 2016. Peep completed a majority of the mixing and mastering himself. In August, First Access Entertainment (FAE) partnered with Lil Peep on a joint venture to invest in and advise him on his career.In September 2016, Lil Peep released his fourth and final solo mixtape, Hellboy. Songs from Hellboy such as "Girls" and "OMFG" received millions of views and plays on SoundCloud and YouTube. Hellboy's success led to Peep's first solo tour across the United States and Europe in the spring of 2017, which included performances in Russia and the UK for the first time in his career. In May 2017, the band Mineral accused Peep of copyright infringement for including an unlicensed and uncredited sample of their song "LoveLetterTypewriter" on his track "Hollywood Dreaming". Peep said that he was only trying to "show some love" with the sample.Soon after the tour was completed, Peep emigrated to London, England. There he began to associate with figures such as Atlanta rapper iLoveMakonnen and longtime friend Bexey, and recorded Come Over When You're Sober, Pt. 1 and Come Over When You're Sober, Pt. 2, the EP Goth Angel Sinner and an unreleased collaborative project with iLoveMakonnen. Peep released his debut studio album, Come Over When You're Sober, Pt. 1, on August 15, 2017. Shortly thereafter he embarked on his second world tour, beginning in the UK in September and moving to Germany before finishing in the United States in November, which was cut short by his death.


=== Posthumous releases ===
After his death, Lil Peep's fanbase and popularity grew quickly, resulting in a significant increase in sales and streams of his music. The single "Awful Things" from Come Over When You're Sober, Part One charted, becoming his first entry on the Billboard Hot 100 at number 79.
Due to Peep's prolific work rate, a number of songs and projects were completed prior to his death. The first official posthumous release arrived within 24 hours of his death, as Wiggy, a director of many of Peep's music videos, released the official video for the then-unreleased song "16 Lines". On January 12, 2018, Marshmello officially released a collaboration titled "Spotlight". The video for "Spotlight" was released on February 12, 2018. On January 15, 2018, rapper Juicy J released the song "Got 'Em Like", which featured Lil Peep and Wiz Khalifa. On January 27, 2018, SoundCloud rapper Teddy released a song collaboration with Lil Peep, "Dreams & Nightmares".In March 2018, Peep's music archive was acquired by Columbia Records. On May 13, 2018, a posthumous single, "4 Gold Chains", featuring Clams Casino, was released as well as a music video. A collaboration album between Peep and rapper iLoveMakonnen is expected to be released on Makonnen's label Warner Bros. On August 17, 2018, Makonnen announced a new Lil Peep single, "Falling Down", a reworking of "Sunlight on Your Skin" that he recorded with Peep in the fall of 2017 in London. The new version features recently deceased rapper XXXTentacion, who recorded his verses following Peep's death. The creation of the single was condemned by some surviving members of GothBoiClique, who said there had been unresolved conflict between the two artists stemming from latter's alleged history of violence towards women. This was disputed by other close friends of Lil Peep. "Falling Down" was released on September 19, 2018, and peaked at number 13 on the Billboard Hot 100. The original "Sunlight on Your Skin" was released on September 27, 2018.On October 14, 2018, Lil Peep's estate revealed that his first posthumous project, Come Over When You're Sober, Pt. 2, was finished in September 2018 and Lil Peep's executive producer for the project, Smokeasac, confirmed that it was just awaiting approval from Peep's family. On October 17, 2018, Lil Peep's estate confirmed that the lead single from Come Over When You're Sober, Pt. 2, "Cry Alone", would be released on October 18, 2018. Come Over When You're Sober, Pt. 2 was released on November 9, 2018. On November 1, 2018, the second single from the album, "Runaway", was officially released. On November 7, 2018, the third single, "Life is Beautiful"—a remix of the track "Life" from the Feelz EP—was released.Come Over When You're Sober, Pt. 2 debuted at number four on the Billboard 200 with 81,000 album-equivalent units (including 43,000 pure album sales), making it Lil Peep's first US top 10 album.On January 31, 2019, the first single from the upcoming collaboration album with iLoveMakonnen, "I've Been Waiting", featuring Fall Out Boy, was released. The song was originally a demo by ILoveMakonnen; Peep then performed on it, spawning a partnership that created up to 20 songs. Fall Out Boy was added to the song after Peep's death.On March 10, 2019, the documentary Everybody's Everything, which chronicles Lil Peep's life, premiered at the SXSW Film Festival. On November 1, 2019, the estate announced the release of the soundtrack to the documentary, which features both previously released and unreleased tracks.
In April 2019, "Gym Class" and "Star Shopping", two Lil Peep singles that were originally released in March 2016 and August 2015 respectively, were re-released onto all streaming platforms by the Lil Peep estate. The 2016 EP Vertigo was subsequently released by the estate to streaming platforms on March 5, 2020. The Peep estate officially released the Crybaby mixtape with most samples cleared to all streaming platforms on June 10, 2020, to coincide with the four-year anniversary of the original release. The track "falling 4 me" was missing as it could not be cleared with Radiohead. The estate released the Hellboy mixtape with most samples cleared on September 25, 2020, the fourth anniversary of its original release. The song "drive by" was reproduced due to sample clearance issues.On January 26, 2021, the estate announced that the California Girls EP was to be re-released. It was released on January 29, 2021, with a music video for the song "lil kennedy". Later, on June 30, 2021, the estate announced the re-release of the Lil Peep and Lil Tracy collaboration EPs, Castles and Castles II. They were released on July 2, 2021, with video of past live performances of certain tracks from the EPs. In the fall of 2021, the estate released Friends and High Fashion, two previously unreleased EPs made in collaboration with Yunggoth and Harry Fraud, respectively. On May 20, 2022, the Feelz EP was re-released, with the videos for "feelz" and "life" also being released. On December 2, 2022, the mixtape LIVE FOREVER was re-released, with the music video for the mixtape's title track also being released.On September 1, 2023, the estate released the collaboration with ILoveMakonnen "November" on all platforms. The estate also confirmed the duo's 2017 collaboration album Diamonds would be released on September 8, 2023.


== Fashion ==
Lil Peep had been into fashion since his teenage years, and during the last months of his life he modelled for Vlone and was invited to and attended several fashion shows such as Balmain men's show at Paris Fashion Week and Moncler Gamme Bleu MFW Mens Spring Summer show in Milan. Nico Amarca of Hypebeast said, "Even though Peep's brand of trendy sits on a far more niche spectrum than most modern-day tastemakers, something that largely attributed to his success. In a time where genuine individuality is becoming increasingly obsolete, Peep was the tattoo-covered, Manic Panic-hued mall rat the creative world needed to disrupt its ever-growing homogeny." Rapper Playboi Carti described Lil Peep as a "trendsetter".His style has been described as evoking fashion styles associated with emo and mall goth. He often wore items including graffitied jackets, colored fur, and pink clothes. He cited Fat Mike, Marcelo Burlon and the Casualties as style influences. In a 2017 interview with GQ, he stated:

I never dress the same way for a week—I'll dress like a whole other person the next week. I like to get weird and mix things. Not necessarily draw on the streets, but mix darker, dirtier cultures with high class shit. And kind of fuse them together and see how they can become one. And I think that already happens when I put on any really elegant piece of clothing, because of the way I look. You expect me to dress like a fucking punk.
In late 2018, it was announced that a Lil Peep clothing line was being created called "No Smoking" (stylized as "NO SMOK!NG") which was developed before Lil Peep's death.


== Musical style ==

Lil Peep was described as making lo-fi rap, being an "emo-trap heart throb" and an "emo rapper". Music journalists often compared Lil Peep to singer-songwriter and guitarist Kurt Cobain. New York Times music critic Jon Caramanica defined Peep as the Kurt Cobain of lo-fi rap, describing his music as gloomy and diabolically melodic. Lil Peep himself encouraged the connection and persona in his musical and lyrical content, saying that he wanted to become the "New Kurt Cobain". According to Angus Harrison from The Guardian, Lil Peep was "repurposing Kurt Cobain for bedroom diarists who are more used to rap than they are guitars."AllMusic described Lil Peep's music as a blend of hip hop and rock influences along with trap, punk, and dream pop. His songs generally drew on the triple-time hi-hats of Southern rap and the angsty introspection of post-hardcore. He combined elements of emo and pop punk into rap music, bringing a fresh take on the genre. This resulted in him being described as the "future of emo" by Steven J. Horowitz of online magazine Pitchfork.As a burgeoning artist, Lil Peep gained a significant amount of traction in the alternative hip-hop scene, establishing a better platform for himself to speak to fans about topics of his concern such as mental health. His lyrical themes include topics such as depression, drug use, past relationships, and suicidal thoughts and meshes together third-wave emo, alternative rock, pop-punk and dream pop with trap music and hip-hop. A close friend and the executive producer of Come Over When You're Sober, Pt. 1 said that Peep "wanted to give a voice to people that suffer from anxiety and depression, people who have been abused, bullied, and the people who were misunderstood like him. He had demons of his own and he faced those demons by creating music."


== Personal life ==
Lil Peep was candid about struggles with his sexuality, depression, heartbreak, and drug use. Lil Peep came out as bisexual in a Twitter post on August 8, 2017. He took to Twitter to open up about this aspect of his personal life to his fans. Lil Peep simply stated, "yes i'm bi sexual." After coming out as bisexual, he would regularly confront homophobes on Twitter. He was also known collaborators with iLoveMakonnen, an openly gay recording artist whose music also blurs the line between rap and rock.Lil Peep came out around the time he and actress and singer Bella Thorne began dating in September 2017. Shortly after the release of his debut studio album, the two were spotted kissing. They briefly dated, before Thorne became involved with rapper Mod Sun. While on the Come Over When You're Sober tour, Lil Peep had met and started dating Instagram influencer Arzaylea Rodriguez around the time of his death in November.Lil Peep actively talked about his issues with depression, anxiety and substance abuse and stated that he had bipolar disorder. Alongside drug use, Lil Peep struggled with suicidal impulses that date back to his adolescent years. On the track "OMFG" from his breakthrough mixtape Hellboy, Lil Peep talked about wanting to kill himself. During an interview, he was asked if he was suicidal. Lil Peep replied, "Yeah, it is serious. I suffer from depression and some days I wake up and I'm like, Fuck, I wish I didn't wake up. That was part of why I moved to California, trying to get away from the place that was doing that to me, and the people I was around." He continued, "I realized it was just myself—it's a chemical imbalance in my brain. Some days I'll be very down and out, but you won't be able to tell, really, because I don't express that side of myself on social media. That's the side of myself that I express through music. That's my channel for letting all that shit out." He claims the frankness with which he spoke about difficulties in his life led to an intense connection with his fans through his music. In an interview with The Times, Lil Peep stated, "They tell me that it saved their lives. They say that I stopped them from committing suicide, which is a beautiful thing. ... It's great for me to hear. It helps. It boosts me, because music saved my life as well."Lil Peep was not medicated for depression. While those around him insisted, he did not want to, and opted to instead smoke cannabis and consume whichever other drugs came his way. In his final interview before his death with Zane Lowe, Peep confessed that his depression was getting worse saying "Things just get worse. Things already get worse and worse and worse every day." Lil Peep regularly referenced addictions to cocaine, ecstasy and Xanax in his lyrics and posts on social media, where he described himself as a "productive junkie" and advised his audience to avoid drug use.At the time of his death, Lil Peep was residing in Portobello Road, London, with his friend and close collaborator Bexey, and Smokeasac. The move was provoked by Peep's need to escape his circumstances and his then-collective GothBoiClique.


== Death ==
On November 15, 2017, Lil Peep was found dead on his tour bus when his manager went to check on him in preparation for that night's performance at a Tucson, Arizona, venue. Foul play was not suspected, with his death believed to be from an overdose. In a series of Instagram posts in the hours leading up to his death, Lil Peep claimed to have ingested psilocybin mushrooms and cannabis concentrate. In another, he claimed to have consumed six Xanax pills following a video depicting his attempts to drop an unidentified pill into his mouth several times before successfully swallowing one and shaking a full prescription bottle. A subsequent post was captioned, "When I die, you'll love me." In the days after his death, a police report revealed that Lil Peep had taken a nap around 5:45 p.m. before the concert. His manager checked on him twice and found him sleeping and breathing fine, but was unable to wake him. When the manager checked on Lil Peep a third time, he was unresponsive and not breathing. Lil Peep's manager performed CPR before medics arrived, though he was pronounced dead at the scene.On December 8, Pima County's Office of the Medical Examiner certified his cause of death as an accidental overdose from the powerful pain medication fentanyl and the benzodiazepine Xanax, a sedative. Toxicology tests were also positive for cannabis, cocaine and the painkiller Tramadol. Urine tests also showed the presence of multiple powerful opioids, including hydrocodone, hydromorphone (marketed under the brand name Dilaudid), oxycodone and oxymorphone. There was no alcohol in his system.


=== Wrongful death lawsuit ===
The rapper's mother Liza Womack filed wrongful death charges against Lil Peep's management FAE grp in 2019, accusing them of "negligence and other breaches of contract which, the lawsuit alleges, contributed to his death in 2017 of an accidental drug overdose." Among the claims in the lawsuit are that FAE was complicit in providing access to "illegal drugs" and "prescription medications", and that the company knowingly allowed drug use to take place during the rapper's tour "despite being aware of his addiction". At one point, the lawsuit charges that FAE encouraged the star to take drugs. In a responding statement, FAE expressed disappointment in the lawsuit:

"Lil Peep's death from an accidental drug overdose was a terrible tragedy. However, the claim that First Access Entertainment, any of its employees, or Chase Ortega, or anyone else under our auspices, was somehow responsible for, complicit in, or contributed to his death is categorically untrue. In fact, we consistently encouraged Peep to stop abusing drugs and to distance himself from the negative influence of the drug users and enablers with whom he chose to associate."
FAE formally filed court documents at the Los Angeles County Superior Court on December 23, 2019, to dispute all claims, including claims of negligence, breach of contract, "and wrongful death". Stennett told Rolling Stone that "[she] felt very protective of Lil Peep from day one." In later documents and court filings, the company said that their work with Lil Peep was an "arm's length business arrangement", something disputed by the rapper's mother.Despite court filings, FAE supported the release of Peep's first posthumous album Come Over When You're Sober, Pt. 2 (2018), which reached number four on the US Billboard 200 chart, a career-best for the rapper. At the start of 2020, the company released statements about their belief that they had no contractual responsibility for Lil Peep's personal life, and that a ruling to suggest so would damage management businesses, "Imposing a duty on FAE Ltd. or FAE LLC to prevent [Lil Peep's] drug overdose would extend the boundaries of legal obligations far beyond any precedent, and far beyond the contractual obligations and reasonable expectations of parties doing business. It would convert businesses engaged in the music and entertainment industries into full-time babysitters for artists. That clearly was not the parties' intent upon entering 'the JVA [(joint-venture agreement)].'"After four years in the court system, the lawsuit was settled in February 2023 before going to trial. While the majority of the terms of the settlement were not made public, it was revealed that moving forward that Peep's entire catalog of music would move from FAE to be handled under the care of his surviving family.


=== Tributes ===
Numerous artists in the music industry paid tribute to Lil Peep following his death, including Diplo, Post Malone, Pete Wentz, Marshmello, Mark Ronson, Zane Lowe, Sam Smith, Bella Thorne, Trippie Redd, A$AP Nast, Rich Brian, Playboi Carti, Ugly God, Lil Uzi Vert, Lil Xan, Ty Dolla Sign, Lil Pump, XXXTentacion, Justin Bieber, Dua Lipa, and El-P. Jon Caramanica, a music critic for The New York Times, held a special remembrance podcast episode to honor Peep following his death which was released on November 22, 2017. Good Charlotte also honored Lil Peep, releasing a cover of "Awful Things", which was shown at his memorial in Long Beach, New York on December 2, 2017. Three Days Grace paid tribute by posting a video on Instagram and Twitter of a remix of Peep's song "Witchblades" featuring Lil Tracy. The remixed song's beat was a slowed down instrumental track of the band's song "The Real You". Lil Peep would be mentioned by Juicy J (who had collaborated with him before his death) on Rae Sremmurd's "Powerglide". Lil Peep was also honored during the 60th Grammy Awards. On June 19, 2018, Juice Wrld released a two-song EP titled Too Soon.. dedicated to him and XXXTentacion, the latter being killed in June 2018. In The 1975 track, "Love It If We Made It", there is a lyric that gives a tribute to Lil Peep: "Rest in peace Lil Peep, The poetry is in the streets". In the song "Glass House" by Machine Gun Kelly, which pays tribute to many deceased artists, Lil Peep is mentioned in the lines: "Wish Lil Peep and me had met, but I can't get that back". Fellow emo rapper XXXTentacion shared similar sentiments, saying that if he and Lil Peep had known each other better that they would have been good friends. XXXTentacion recorded a verse for a song in tribute to Lil Peep prior to his own murder, which was later turned into the posthumous collaboration "Falling Down". Grimes stated that she wrote the song "Delete Forever" on the night of Lil Peep's death, with the lyrics being inspired by substance abuse.Lil Peep was cremated at Huntington Station, New York. On December 2, 2017, friends, family and fans paid their respects to Lil Peep at his memorial in Long Beach, New York. A memorial was also held in London on the same day that a large picture of Lil Peep was projected onto the side of the Houses of Parliament in central London.


== Legacy and influence ==
Before dying at the age of 21, Lil Peep came to be an inspiration to outcasts and youth subcultures drawn together by the internet. He earned legions of fans in a short time from both hip hop and emo subcultures. Although he did not claim so himself, he is widely considered to have made a style of music that has been since regarded "emo rap". He has been credited as the leading figure of the mid–late 2010s emo music scene and is commonly cited as an inspiration for upcoming emo rappers.At the time of Lil Peep's death, he was on the cusp of something significant. Three months earlier, he'd released Come Over When You're Sober, Pt. 1, the album that took the skeleton sound he'd developed in his bedroom — emo sentimentality, thunderous hip-hop underbelly, rock-star insouciance — and thickened it up. His mixtapes Hellboy and Crybaby, released on SoundCloud, were on the front lines of hip-hop's open-eared engagement with other genres, as well as documents of the ways emo and pop-punk had begun to make room for hip-hop. He was at the musical vanguard and, covered in a symphony of tattoos, an emerging fashion icon as well. – New York Times music critic Jon CaramanicaIn 2017, Pitchfork hailed Lil Peep as "the future of emo". Regarding his death, in January 2018, John Jeremiah Sullivan of GQ wrote, "When Lil Peep died late last year, he left behind an outsized legacy." Rolling Stone journalist Elias Leight concurred similarly and wrote that Lil Peep's "rise to stardom was powered by relentless drive." A profile on his artistry was written by Billboard editor Steven Horowitz. The lengthy article resulted in an influx of think pieces centered around Lil Peep amongst writers, with music publications such as Noisey discussing his role within the broader emo genre. Though it allowed Peep to gather attention from a wide audience beyond his SoundCloud base, the piece polarized readers, some of whom protested applying the "future of emo" label to the young rapper in the headline. However, Lil Peep has since become regarded being an integral part of a "post-emo revival style of hip hop and rock", and had been described as "arguably the biggest emo icon of the past few years"The death of Lil Peep left an impact on several of his musical contemporaries. Lil Uzi Vert offered tribute by sharing on Twitter an edited version of one of the final photos Lil Peep had shared online. The news of Lil Peep's tragic passing greatly affected Lil Uzi Vert, who shortly tweeted, "We would love 2 stop ..... but do you really care cause we been on xanax all fucking year. [...] Rip buddy I 100% understand and I don't fault u." The prescription pills Xanax has since become an epidemic in the hip hop realm, particularly among the current SoundCloud generation. The SoundCloud rap scene Lil Peep originated from is notorious for its drug use, with artists often abusing prescription pills such as Xanax which have since become a go-to metaphor in their lyrics. In an assessment of the reactions, many were hopeful Lil Peep's death has served as a wake-up call for the community regarding drug abuse. After offering their thoughts, Lil Uzi Vert indicated they were looking to do something for themselves in response to Lil Peep's untimely passing. Lil Uzi Vert also seemed to make attempts to detox, and the following Thursday tweeted an update saying they were sober for the day and already shaking.In the years following his death, Lil Peep became influential on the development of the e-girls and e-boys subculture.In addition to calling him "the future of emo", Pitchfork also posited that Lil Peep's willingness to be vulnerable was an antidote to the toxic attitude towards women, which in the past has been a core element of hip-hop culture and its rap-rock variant. According to fellow GothBoiClique member, Fish Narc, Lil Peep explicitly rejected contemporary SoundCloud rapper XXXTentacion for his alleged history of violence against his ex-girlfriend, spending time and money removing XXXTentacion's songs from his Spotify playlists. On the contrary, rapper Fat Nick, a mutual friend of Lil Peep and XXXTentacion, said on Twitter that right before Peep died, he and Peep had a conversation about XXXTentacion and had planned to meet up with him, and that XXXTentacion was "super happy about it". Fat Nick also spoke about the matter on an Instagram livestream, where he dismissed the claims from Fish Narc and others about tension between XXXTentacion and Lil Peep, and confirmed that Lil Peep wanted to meet XXXTentacion once he was off tour. In the livestream, he also implied that members of GothBoiClique were responsible for Lil Peep's death, saying, "Some of y'all are siding with the people that took advantage of Peep. I don't get it... That's crazy. Y'all say shit about fucking X, but you're not saying shit about the people that killed [Lil Peep]... The people that gave him fentanyl. Y'all don't say shit to them." After this, Fish Narc faced criticism for his initial statement condemning the song. Fish Narc responded on Twitter, "I feel that people think I am trying to insult X. But really I wish him rest. I protest a posthumous collab between unaffiliated artists", and clarified that he did not wish to attack XXXTentacion and that his comments were, "how I interpreted what Peep told me as a friend." When the posthumous 2018 single, "Falling Down", was created without Lil Peep's consent, uniting the two deceased rappers, some Lil Peep fans and some of Lil Peep's friends opposed the retroactive inclusion of XXXTentacion. Some surviving band members posted a story onto Instagram disavowing the collaboration and imploring others not to listen to it. Following his death, Mic bemoaned: "Sadly, Peep had barely just begun bringing emo into the future with a message that many of his less woman-friendly influences, like Brand New, have failed to put forward." He continued saying, "For a 'crybaby' who left this world so young, Peep inspired a lot of people to keep going." The day after hearing news of his death, rapper Lil B paid tribute through a tweet. He wrote, "I remember Lil peep telling me he is against the sexual abuse of women and people in the music industry ... I will continue to push his vision."


=== Achievements ===
Having arisen from SoundCloud scene, Lil Peep was a large presence on social media and came to be revered online. He attracted a cult following through the songs he released and their emotional, downtrodden lyrics. Lil Peep also enjoyed the draw of his YouTube channel, where several millions of views were generated by his music videos for "Awful Things", "Benz Truck", "The Brightside" among others.According to The Atlantic, "If you were going to bet on the young musicians most likely to soon be superstars, until yesterday, a lot of smart money would have been on Lil Peep." Lil Peep had laid before him a promising career, which had been on the rise since 2015 thanks to a series of tracks, EPs and mixtapes released on SoundCloud. After being around for a little more than a year, Lil Peep had already managed to amass millions of hits on YouTube and SoundCloud. A year after posting his first song, Lil Peep attracted 82,000 followers on SoundCloud and 112,000 followers on Instagram. The burgeoning rapper had generated millions of online streams before releasing his debut album Come Over When You're Sober Pt. 1 in August 2017. Despite being involved with GothBoiClique for the shortest amount of time, Lil Peep became the first member of the group to be paid serious critical attention as well as tour internationally. Due in part to his divisive nature, Lil Peep made his way onto Pitchfork's "Best Songs of the Year" list and completed a largely sold-out tour of Russia and Europe.


== Discography ==

Studio albums

Come Over When You're Sober, Pt. 1 (2017)
Come Over When You're Sober, Pt. 2 (2018)Collaborative albums

Diamonds (with iLoveMakonnen) (2023)


== Filmography ==


== Concert tours ==
Come Over When You're Sober Tour (2017)


== References ==


== Further reading ==
"Emo rapper Lil Peep embodies sadboi aesthetic in new album". Rocky Mountain Collegian. September 7, 2017. Archived from the original on September 20, 2017. Retrieved September 20, 2017 – via collegian.com.


== External links ==

Lil Peep on Facebook Lil Peep on Instagram Lil Peep on TwitterTione Jayden Merritt (born April 30, 2001), known professionally as Lil Tjay ( TEE-jay), is an American rapper and singer. He rose to prominence in 2017 with the song "Resume", and then the release of his breakthrough song "Brothers" which led him to sign with Columbia Records later during that same year. Lil Tjay's debut studio album, True 2 Myself, was released in 2019 and debuted at number 5 on the Billboard 200, marking the album his first charting project. The following year, he released the mixtape State of Emergency, that featured only drill artists from New York City. 
His second studio album, Destined 2 Win, was released in 2021 and included the single "Calling My Phone" (with 6lack); his highest-charting song to date. In 2023, released the song "Gangsta Boo" with fellow New York artist Ice Spice, and released his third studio album, 222, in July of that year.


== Early life ==
Merritt was born and raised in the Fordham neighborhood of the Bronx, New York City. He was raised by a single mother and has two younger siblings in what was described as a "roomy" apartment. Merritt called himself the problematic child out of the three, as he would often get himself into petty robberies and school fights. At the age of 15, Merritt was arrested for one of his robberies and was sentenced for a year to a youth detention center where he would begin to write raps; they included one of his hit songs "Resume", which he released on SoundCloud.Merritt's childhood friend, Smelly, was fatally stabbed in August 2016. Merritt pays tribute to his childhood friend in a number of his songs referencing his name, "Smelly".


== Career ==


=== 2016–2019: Beginnings, record deal, and True 2 Myself ===
In 2016, Merritt began releasing music on SoundCloud. "Resume", one of his first songs, was released when Merritt was 16 years old, and quickly began spreading online.
On March 10, 2018, Merritt competed and placed first at the NYC All Ages Edition of Coast 2 Coast LIVE, where his performance gained the attention of a record label A&R who was in attendance to judge the showcase. Soon after, Merritt released the single "Brothers", which became his biggest song at the time and led to him signing with Columbia Records.Released on YouTube in 2018, Merritt earned himself recognition through his sampling of Justin Bieber's "Baby" on his single, "None of Your Love".Within the first ten months of Merritt's music career, he had released five tracks that recorded over one million plays on SoundCloud. "Brothers", "Resume", "Goat", and "Leaked" each accumulated tens of millions of streams. In July 2018, Merritt worked with producer CashMoneyAP to release "None of Your Love", which also amassed tens of millions of plays. Merritt released his debut EP No Comparison at the end of 2018.In January 2019, Merritt was featured on fellow rapper Polo G's single "Pop Out", which peaked at number 11 on the Billboard Hot 100. In July, he was featured on boy band PrettyMuch's "Lying". Later that year, he released an EP titled F.N; the project's lead single, "F.N", peaked at number 56 on the Billboard Hot 100 and became his first solo charting song. Merritt released his debut album True 2 Myself on October 11, 2019. It debuted and peaked at number 5 on the US Billboard 200. In December, he was featured on a remix of 24kGoldn's song "Valentino".


=== 2020–2021: State of Emergency and Destined 2 Win ===
In early 2020, Merritt reached the Billboard Hot 100 again with his single "20/20", which peaked at number 94 on the chart. On May 8, 2020, Merritt released the EP State of Emergency, which focused heavily on drill music, a popular subgenre in New York City. The seven-song EP included the track "Zoo York" (featuring Fivio Foreign and Pop Smoke), which peaked at number 65 on the Hot 100. In July, Merritt appeared on Pop Smoke's debut posthumous album, Shoot for the Stars, Aim for the Moon, on the track "Mood Swings", which reached number 17 on the Billboard Hot 100. On August 11, Merritt was included on XXL's 2020 Freshman Class. In October, Merritt hinted at a new project on Twitter.On February 12, 2021, Merritt released his single "Calling My Phone", a collaboration with Atlanta singer 6lack, which was accompanied by a music video directed by Cam Busby. The song debuted at number three on the Billboard Hot 100, becoming the highest-charting single of Merritt's career. On March 19, Merritt released "Headshot", a collaboration with Polo G and Fivio Foreign as the second single from his second studio album, Destined 2 Win, which was released on April 2, 2021. The album consists of twenty-one tracks. On October 22, Merritt released the lead single to his upcoming third studio album "Not in the Mood" (featuring Fivio Foreign and Kay Flock). The single was teased in snippets using TikTok from September prior to its release.


=== 2022–present: 222 ===
In early March 2022, Merritt began teasing a new song titled "In My Head" which uses a sample of Iyaz's "Replay". It was eventually released on April 1, 2022. On April, Merritt released a freestyle "Lavish" on his YouTube channel. The following day, he announced his EP Strictly 4 My Fans. On August 26, Merritt released his single "Beat the Odds", which details his near-fatal shooting and an update on his recovery. On November 17, Merritt teased a trailer for his single "Give You What You Want", which was released the same day at 4 p.m. on YouTube.In late June 2023, Merritt revealed on social media that a new album was on the way and released its lead singles "June 22nd" on June 23, which that he revealed the album's title 222 on Instagram, and "Project Walls" featuring YoungBoy Never Broke Again on July 7, on which he also revealed the album's cover and tracklist with features from Summer Walker, The Kid LAROI, Fivio Foreign, Jadakiss, Polo G and Coco Jones. Before the album's release, Merritt released short documentaries on his social media and performed "Bla Bla" with Fivio Foreign at Wireless Festival 2023. 222 was released on July 14, 2023. 222 sold 22k in its first week.


== 2022 shooting ==
On June 22, 2022, Merritt was shot seven times during an attempted robbery in Edgewater, New Jersey. He was flown to Hackensack University Medical Center and underwent emergency surgery, while a second victim—22-year-old Antoine Boyd—who is friends with Merritt, was also shot once and was in stable condition. Meanwhile, the shooter was also hit by gunfire, and escaped with help from an unidentified co-conspirator. The Bergen County Prosecutor's Office reported that the shooting did not appear random, and that one victim was upgraded from critical to stable condition, while the other was in good condition.Later that day, police arrested 27-year-old Mohamed Konate, who was charged with three counts of first-degree attempted murder, three counts of first-degree armed robbery, and multiple weapons offenses. Jeffery Valdez, who was with Merritt but was not injured, and Antoine Boyd were both charged with second-degree unlawful possession of a weapon, but charges were later dropped. Merritt was not charged with any crime.On June 23, 2022, it was reported that Merritt was still unconscious following the shooting. Days following a lack of any credible updates on Merritt's condition, rumors began to surface claiming that he was paralyzed and possibly brain dead. However, multiple sources later disproved these rumors, as news came out on July 1, 2022, stating that Merritt was still hospitalized but "alert and talking."On August 24, 2022, Merrit uploaded an update video on his social media accounts. In the video, he states how he's doing better and is "going to come back stronger than ever" while wearing a neck brace.On August 26, 2022, Merritt released his single "Beat the Odds", which details his near-fatal experience and recovery.


== Legal issues ==
On January 16, 2023, Merritt was arrested in the Bronx and was placed in police custody, following a traffic stop. Merritt was on his way to film with fellow Bronx rapper Ice Spice at the time of the arrest. The police found a handgun in the vehicle, before arresting him. He was charged with weapon possession and a court date was set for February 14. It is unknown whether Merritt attended the trial, and what the results of the trial were.Merritt's attorney, Dawn Florio, claims the gun found by police does not belong to Merritt. She also claims that the search conducted by officers was conducted illegally, as the car was allegedly parked legally on the street and Merritt was allegedly a passenger in the car.Lil Tjay and director Fakedell’s film crew were arrested in June of 2023 for a firearm used during shooting of a music video. The incident was caught on video by a crowd of kids first pleading with the cops to not arrest him, and that the gun was just a prop.


== Artistry ==
Influenced by his upbringing in the Bronx, Merritt is a melodic rapper who frequently incorporates Auto-Tune in his songs. He has drawn comparisons to fellow New York rapper A Boogie wit da Hoodie. In an interview with Rolling Stone, he revealed that his biggest musical influences are Drake, Meek Mill, and Usher. In the same interview, Merritt described his music as having a melodic sound when singing or rapping about his past struggles. Merritt also credits his success to his year spent in prison, where he claims that his ability to write songs peaked. In Pitchfork's featured article on Merritt, he is referred to as a "hip-hop heartthrob". Later in the interview, Merritt explained that he is often called the "Bronx Justin Bieber" because of his sampling of Justin Bieber's "Baby" on his song, "None of Your Love".


== Live performances ==
Merritt accompanied Seattle rapper Lil Mosey on his nationwide tour throughout 2019. He also has performed at the three-day Rolling Loud music festival along with Migos, Travis Scott, and Kid Cudi in Miami Gardens, Florida, in May 2019 and at the Los Angeles festival in December. He frequently appears and performs on concerts with close friend Jay Gwuapo.In September 2022, a few months after the shooting, Merritt performed his first concert since being shot. He returned to the stage for his 2022 Rolling Loud performance on September 23 in New York.


== Discography ==

True 2 Myself (2019)
Destined 2 Win (2021)
222 (2023)


== Tours ==
No Escape (2019)
True 2 Myself (2020)
Destined 2 Win (2021)
Beat The Odds (2023)


== References ==


== External links ==
 
Official websiteKimberly Denise Jones (born July 11, 1974), better known by her stage name Lil' Kim, is an American rapper. She was born and raised in New York City and lived much of her adolescent life on the streets after being expelled from home. In her teens, she would freestyle rap, influenced by fellow female hip-hop artists like MC Lyte and the Lady of Rage. In 1994, she was discovered by fellow rapper The Notorious B.I.G., who invited her to join his group Junior M.A.F.I.A.; their debut album, Conspiracy, generated two top 20 singles in the United States and was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA).
Lil' Kim's debut studio album Hard Core (1996) was certified double platinum in March 2001. Since its release, it has sold more than six million copies worldwide and spawned three successful singles: "No Time," "Not Tonight (Ladies Night)," and "Crush on You." Hard Core had the highest debut in the US for a female rap album at the time. Her following albums, The Notorious K.I.M. (2000) and La Bella Mafia (2003) were also certified platinum. In 2001, Lil' Kim reached number one on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 with the single "Lady Marmalade" (a remake of LaBelle's 1974 single), alongside Mýa, Pink, and Christina Aguilera. Other notable singles from this period include "The Jump Off" and "Magic Stick," the latter of which reached number two on the Billboard Hot 100, becoming her 2nd-highest-charting single as a lead artist.
In 2005, Lil' Kim served a one-year prison sentence for lying to a jury about her friends' involvement in a shooting four years earlier. During her incarceration, her fourth album, The Naked Truth, was released to positive reviews from critics. A reality series covering her sentence, Lil' Kim: Countdown to Lockdown, premiered on BET in 2006. She then released her first mixtape, Ms. G.O.A.T. (2008) and returned to the public eye in 2009 with an appearance on Dancing with the Stars. Throughout the 2010s, she continued to release music and perform sporadically, collaborating with artists such as Faith Evans, Remy Ma, and Fabolous. Her fifth studio album, 9, was released in 2019.
Lil' Kim has been referred to as the "Queen of Rap," as well as her alias "Queen Bee" by several media outlets. She has sold more than 15 million albums and 30 million singles worldwide. Her songs "No Time," "Big Momma Thang," and "Not Tonight (Ladies Night)" were each listed on Complex's list of the 50 Best Rap Songs By Women. In 2012, she was listed on VH1's 100 Greatest Women in Music list at number 45, the second-highest position for a solo female hip-hop artist. Aside from music, she is also known for her risk-taking and luxurious approach to fashion which has inspired many artists; she has been cited as a fashion icon. She has been noted for helping women embrace their "sexuality and femininity" in a way that was a stark contrast at the time from other female artists.


== Early life, family and education ==
Jones was born in the Bedford–Stuyvesant neighborhood of Brooklyn, New York City, the second child of Linwood Jones, a former U.S. Marine. She has an older brother, Christopher. As a child, Jones attended Queen of All Saints Elementary School in Brooklyn. When she was nine years old, her parents separated, and Jones was raised by her father, with whom she had a tumultuous relationship. At fourteen, she left home, began living on the streets, and ended up dropping out of high school.As a teenager, Jones met Christopher Wallace, known professionally as the Notorious B.I.G., who was a key figure in both her personal and artistic life, particularly after Wallace gained popularity and influence through his relationship with Bad Boy Records, founded by Sean "Puffy" Combs. Jones attended Sarah J. Hale Vocational High School for two-and-a-half years. Many of her friends also went there, and they would all often skip school together. Since she was not completing her schoolwork, the decision was made for her to transfer to Brooklyn College Academy to finish her remaining year and a half of high school. This was the same school that fellow rappers Nas and Foxy Brown attended.


== Career ==
In 1994, B.I.G. was instrumental in introducing and promoting the Brooklyn-based group Junior M.A.F.I.A. Jones, who had adopted the stage name Lil' Kim, was a member of the group. The group's debut album, Conspiracy, was released to mediocre reviews and moderate sales on August 29, 1995, but debuted at number eight on the U.S. Billboard 200 chart, selling 69,000 copies in its first week of release. Wallace wrote and ghostwrote most of the album's material. Three hit singles came from Conspiracy: "Player's Anthem," "I Need You Tonight," and "Get Money." The RIAA certified Conspiracy a Gold album on December 6, 1995. "Player's Anthem" and "Get Money" were certified gold and platinum respectively. Lil' Kim's increasing popularity as a member of Junior M.A.F.I.A. allowed her to start a solo career shortly after the Conspiracy album was released. By late 1995, she began working on what would become her debut album, Hard Core.


=== 1996–2002: Hard Core and The Notorious K.I.M. ===
After a year with Junior M.A.F.I.A., Lil' Kim began her solo career by making guest performances on R&B albums and recording her debut album, Hard Core, which was released in November 1996. The album debuted at number 11 on the Billboard 200, the highest debut for a female rap album at that time, and number 3 on Billboard's Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums, selling 78,000 copies in its first week of release and has sold over 5 million copies worldwide. It was certified double platinum by the RIAA on March 14, 2001, after having been certified gold on January 6, 1997, and platinum on June 3, 1997.The album's lead single "No Time," a duet with Combs, reached the top spot of the Billboard Hot Rap Tracks chart and was certified gold by the RIAA. The following single was "Crush on You," a remixed version of the track that appeared on Hard Core. A remix of the album's track "Not Tonight" saw Lil' Kim team up with Missy Elliott, Angie Martinez, Da Brat, and Left Eye of TLC with the song peaking at 6 on the Billboard Hot 100. The song was part of the soundtrack to the Martin Lawrence movie Nothing to Lose, nominated for a Grammy Award, and certified platinum. She became the first female rapper to have three consecutive number ones on the Billboard Hot Rap Tracks chart.In one stockholders' meeting of Warner Bros. Records, activist C. Delores Tucker criticized the label "for producing this filth," referring to perceived graphic sexual content in Lil' Kim's lyrics, and labeling them "gangsta porno rap." In 1997, Lil' Kim promoted Hard Core by performing on P. Diddy's "No Way Out" tour. The tour continued through to 1998 and became one of the highest-grossing hip-hop tours of all time, grossing an estimated $16 million. That same year, she launched her own label, Queen Bee Entertainment.From 1998 to 2000, Lil' Kim continued working under the management of B.I.G.'s best friend, Damion "D-Roc" Butler's "Roc Management," touring and modeling for various fashion and pop culture companies including Candie's, Versace, Iceberg, and Baby Phat. Her outfit at the 1999 MTV Video Music Awards received widespread media attention, fueled by the "shocked" response of presenter Diana Ross, who approached and jiggled Kim's exposed breast on national television. The Washington Post considered that the incident solidified Lil' Kim's "image of sexual fearlessness" and her career as "a fashion trendsetter."On June 27, 2000, Lil' Kim released her second album, The Notorious K.I.M. The album marked a new image and revamped look for the rapper. Despite the limited success of its singles, the album debuted at number 4 on the Billboard 200 and number 1 on the Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums chart, selling 229,000 copies in its first week. It was certified platinum by the RIAA, four weeks after its release. It was on this LP that the well-known hip-hop feud between Lil' Kim and Foxy Brown escalated. In 2001, Lil' Kim teamed up with Christina Aguilera, Pink, and Mýa to remake "Lady Marmalade," which was originally written about a bordello in New Orleans and performed by the group Labelle (which included diva Patti LaBelle) 25 years earlier.The song was recorded for the Moulin Rouge! film soundtrack, released in April 2001, and stayed at number 1 on the Billboard Hot 100 for five weeks. The song also went to number 1 in 50 countries around the world. This was a major accomplishment for female rap, as well as for Lil' Kim, who scored her first number 1 Hot 100 hit and became the second solo female rapper in history to hit number one on the Billboard Hot 100 charts."Lady Marmalade" also garnered Lil' Kim her first Grammy Award. The second single, "Kimnotyze," was released as the lead single of record producer DJ Tomekk's compilation album Beat Of Life, Vol 1. It was released in Switzerland, Austria, and Germany only. The song was successful, becoming Lil' Kim's third consecutive top 10 hit in Germany after her number 5 hit "Lady Marmalade."
In 2002, Lil' Kim recorded a new entrance theme for then World Wrestling Entertainment (WWE) Women's Champion Trish Stratus entitled "Time to Rock 'n Roll," which was used during broadcasts, until Stratus' retirement. The single was released on WWE Anthology, a compilation of entrance theme music to various professional wrestling superstars. Lil' Kim released the song "What's The Word" in mid-2002. Despite not having an official release, it went on to peak at number 9 on the Bubbling Under R&B/Hip-Hop Singles chart. It would later be released on the Japan edition of her third studio album, La Bella Mafia, as a bonus track.


=== 2003–2005: La Bella Mafia ===
On March 4, 2003, Lil' Kim released her third studio album, La Bella Mafia. It debuted at number 5 on the Billboard 200, selling 166,000 copies in its first week, giving Lil' Kim her second consecutive top 5 album. The album received generally positive reviews from critics, receiving a score of 65 on Metacritic. A buzz single, "Came Back For You," was released ahead of the album, the music video for the song featured reality television personality Victoria Gotti.The first single, "The Jump Off," featuring Mr. Cheeks, peaked at number 16 on the Billboard Hot 100. Follow up single, "Magic Stick," featuring 50 Cent, peaked at number two on the Billboard Hot 100, staying there for three weeks. The song did not have a commercial release or a music video but was successful due to high radio airplay, peaking at number one on the Billboard Airplay chart. A third US-only single, "Thug Luv," featuring Twista, was released in the last quarter of 2003 and peaked at number 60 on the Billboard Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart. The album was certified platinum in the US, selling over 1.1 million copies.Lil' Kim promoted the album with a string of concerts, which also featured DMX and Nas. Lil' Kim was nominated for five Source Awards and won two ("Female Hip-Hop Artist of the Year," and "Female Single of the Year"). The album also got two Grammy Award nominations for Best Female Rap Solo Performance ("Came Back For You") and Best Rap Collaboration ("Magic Stick"). She was also nominated for Best Pop Collaboration with singer Christina Aguilera for the song "Can't Hold Us Down," from Aguilera's album Stripped.
Greg Thomas, an English professor at Syracuse University, began teaching "Hip-Hop Eshu: Queen B@#$H Lyricism 101." Lil' Kim herself was a guest speaker. Professor Thomas considered Lil' Kim's lyrics "the art with the most profound sexual politics I've ever seen anywhere." David Horowitz criticized the course as "academic degeneracy and decline." Lil' Kim also made an appearance on the multi-platform videogame Def Jam: Fight for NY. Lil' Kim provided voice-overs for her part in the storyline, where the player may fight an opponent to have Lil' Kim as their girlfriend.In 2004, Lil' Kim recorded a cover of "These Boots Are Made for Walkin'" which was used as the opening theme for Victoria Gotti's reality series Growing Up Gotti. That same year, Lil' Kim was featured on the remix of "Naughty Girl" by Beyoncé. In December 2004, Lil' Kim began recording a pilot for a VH1 reality show titled 718 Makeover. The 718 in the title is the area code for Brooklyn, where she grew up. The show did not make it to air.


=== 2005–2008: Prison, The Naked Truth and Ms. G.O.A.T ===
Lil' Kim released her fourth album, The Naked Truth, on September 27, 2005, while serving a federal prison sentence. It earned her a 5 mic rating from The Source, making her the only female rapper to ever receive a 5 mic rating. The album debuted at number 6 on the Billboard 200 chart, selling 109,000 copies in its first week of release, giving Lil' Kim her third top 10 debut on the chart. The Naked Truth did not sell as well as her previous works, it only managed to reach a gold certification by RIAA. She said that her prison sentence left her with no time to promote the project.
The music video for The Naked Truth's first single, "Lighters Up," was number one on BET's 106 & Park for two weeks. "Lighters Up" was a Top Ten hit on the Billboard Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Singles & Tracks chart. The single also reached number 67 on the German Single Chart, number 12 on the UK Top 75 and number 4 on the Finland Single Chart. The second single, "Whoa" was released on February 17, 2006. It reached number 22 on Airplay.
On March 9, 2006, BET premiered the show Lil' Kim: Countdown to Lockdown, which was filmed before Lil' Kim headed to prison. The show became the highest rated premiere in BET history, averaging 1.9 million viewers. In May 2006, Debbie Harry released a song in tribute to Lil' Kim called "Dirty and Deep" in protest of her conviction. The song was available for free from her official website. Dance Remixes, her first compilation album, was released on June 6, 2006. The album featured remixes of songs from The Naked Truth and Hard Core.
A limited pressing released only in the US, it received no promotion, due to Lil' Kim being in prison at the time of release, and failed to chart. On August 31, 2006, Lil' Kim presented the award for Best Male Video at the 2006 MTV Video Music Awards, it marked her first televised appearance since being released from prison. She also made appearances on the show The Pussycat Dolls Present: The Search for the Next Doll and Pussycat Dolls Present: Girlicious in 2007 and 2008 as a judge.
In January 2008, Lil' Kim announced that she had parted ways with Atlantic Records, choosing to release future projects independently. She stated she had no hard feelings toward Atlantic, but felt comfortable enough with her knowledge of the music business to do it alone. Lil' Kim released her first mixtape, Ms. G.O.A.T., an acronym for "Greatest of All Time," on June 3, 2008. It was produced by New York City DJs Mister Cee and DJ Whoo Kid. Among critics, the mixtape received generally positive reviews. It has been called a representation of Lil' Kim's return to the streets. Tito Salinas of All Hip Hop says "Lil' Kim shows that her time behind bars did not rust all of her swag away" on Ms. G.O.A.T. On the other hand, Ehren Gresehover of New York Mag says that although one of the tracks "The Miseducation of Lil' Kim" is not bad, he wished it was Lauryn Hill making a comeback instead.


=== 2009–2011: Dancing with the Stars and Black Friday ===
On March 10, 2009, the song "Girls" by Korean singer Seven featuring Lil' Kim was released through digital stores as his U.S. debut single. Lil' Kim appeared in the music video that was released on the same day. "Girls" was produced by Darkchild. On March 24, 2009, she released the song "Download" featuring R&B singers T-Pain and Charlie Wilson. It was written by Lil' Kim and T-Pain and produced by Trackmasters. The song samples "Computer Love" by Zapp. Although it missed the Hot 100, it did chart on the Billboard Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart, peaking at number 21.
Lil' Kim appeared on the eighth season of reality series Dancing with the Stars, which began airing on March 9, 2009. She was paired with professional dancer Derek Hough. They were eliminated on May 5, 2009, against Ty Murray and his partner Chelsie Hightower, putting Lil' Kim at fifth place among all thirteen contestants that season. Her elimination was met by many boos from the audience, as she was a consistent high-scorer and fan favorite.On February 16, 2010, the Ludacris song "Hey Ho," which featured Lil' Kim and Lil Fate, was released as a promo single for his seventh studio album Battle of the Sexes. In June 2010, Lil' Kim started her 2010 Tour, her first headlining tour since 2000. It took her across the US, as well as Canada and Europe.
Lil' Kim released her second mixtape, Black Friday, on February 14, 2011. The video for the title track was released on February 16, 2011. The mixtape received mostly negative reviews from critics. It was made available for purchase via PayPal. In May 2011, Lil' Kim performed in South Africa as part of the music festival ZarFest alongside Fat Joe, Timbaland, and Ciara.On June 19, 2011, Lil' Kim performed alongside G-Unit member Shawty Lo and hinted a possible working relationship with G-Unit Records. That same month the song Lil' Kim, along with Rick Ross, was featured on titled "Anything (To Find You)," by R&B singer Monica was leaked. The song, which samples the Notorious B.I.G.'s "Who Shot Ya?," initially featured just Lil' Kim, but her second verse was removed to make room for Ross. Her vocals were then removed fully due to contractual issues with B.I.G.'s estate.In August 2011, Lil' Kim performed four dates in Australia as part of the WinterBeatz Festival alongside Fabolous, Mario, 50 Cent and G-Unit. During the August, 17 date in Perth, she joined 50 Cent on stage for a performance of "Magic Stick." It marked the first time the pair had performed the song together. On November 28, 2011, Lil' Kim released a buzz single called "I Am Not the One." She also announced that she would release an EP, but it was later shelved for unknown reasons.


=== 2012–2016: Hard Core mixtape and Lil Kim Season ===
In the summer of 2011, Lil' Kim began recording material for her fifth studio album. She had previously been under a restriction banning her from releasing new material as a result of her settlement with Trackmasters, but it had now been lifted. On Valentine's Day 2012, Lil' Kim released the song "If You Love Me" produced by Prince Saheb of Knockout Entertainment as a gift to her fans. That same month it was announced she would make her return to the stage on BET's Rip the Runway. It marked her first televised performance in years.
In March 2012, during an interview with MTV's Sucker Free, Lil' Kim revealed that contract issues with production duo Trackmasters were the reason behind her album delay, saying ."..contractually, by the courts, I could not record any music – I wasn't supposed to put any music out." On March 23, 2012, the song "Keys to the City," a collaboration with Young Jeezy, was leaked to the Internet. Lil' Kim first mentioned the song during an interview with MTV's RapFix, saying "I have a song with another celebrity person that I know the world and my fans are gonna love... It's vintage Kim mixed with the new Kim." During the same RapFix interview, Lil' Kim also revealed another song, titled "I'm Ready," which she hopes to do with rapper 50 Cent. Lil' Kim also commented on the direction of her music, saying she was in "Kanye West mode," adding ."..You do whatever you want to do ...it's all about taking chances." Lil' Kim kicked off her Return of the Queen Tour on May 17, 2012, to positive reviews.In a radio interview at Miami's 99 Jamz, Lil' Kim stated that her book, The Price of Loyalty, was on hold to coincide with the release of her new album. During an interview with XXL on April 26, 2013, she revealed that she does not have a name for the album yet, but the first official single would be out by mid year. Lil' Kim described the single, produced by Bangladesh, as "different" and "sweet dessert." On July 11, 2013, Lil' Kim released the Rockwilder-produced single "Looks Like Money" as a free download for her fans on her birthday.On July 26, 2013, Lil' Kim announced and released the cover art for a new mixtape, Hard Core 2K13, which would also serve as a sequel to her critically acclaimed debut album, Hard Core. The mixtape was originally set to be released on October 31, 2013, but for then unknown reasons, was pushed back. To make up for not releasing the mixtape, Lil' Kim released the singles "Dead Gal Walking" and "Kimmy Blanco" to the public, along with the track list. The track list revealed collaborations with French Montana, Miley Cyrus, Jadakiss, and Yo Gotti.
On August 2, 2014, Lil' Kim announced via her Twitter page that she would launch a concert tour to promote her forthcoming Hard Core Mixtape. Throughout the remainder of August, Lil' Kim released a number of remixes to popular songs, including Beyoncé's and Nicki Minaj's collaboration on "Flawless," seemingly as a diss to Minaj, reigniting the feud between the two rappers.On September 11, 2014, the Hard Core mixtape was released as free download on Kim's official website. In an interview with Revolt TV on the same day, she revealed that she, Iggy Azalea, and T.I. would collaborate on a song sometime in the future, saying "I don't know if it's going to be for my album or if we're just going to…we have other plans for it as well. But, I think we're going to do a double release." In the same interview, she explained why the mixtape was pushed back twice, stating "When this project was supposed to come out I had got pregnant. I didn't know. [...] Once I became fully pregnant, I was working in the studio but at one point I couldn't work anymore, obviously."In 2016, her fourth mixtape Lil Kim Season was released. On the mixtape, she freestyles over several popular beats, Drake's "Summer Sixteen," Rihanna's "Work," and Desiigner's "Panda." It received mixed reviews from critics. Jen Yamato from The Daily Beast wrote, "if anything, Lil Kim Season indicates that Kim's got her sights set on returning in a big way—and that she's collecting collaborators who might help her achieve it."


=== 2017–present: Girls Cruise and 9 ===
In February 2017, Lil' Kim announced via her Instagram and an interview that she was working on a new album. Singer Faith Evans featured her on the song "Lovin You for Life" on the album The King & I, released on May 19, 2017. That same month, Lil' Kim along with Eve and Trina was featured on the remix of "I'm Better" by Missy Elliott.  In November, Lil' Kim released a promotional single "Took Us a Break," and was featured on the song "Wake Me Up" by rapper Remy Ma. In March 2018, Lil' Kim released another promotional single, "Spicy," featuring rapper Fabolous.On July 11, 2018, Lil' Kim released the single "Nasty One" from her highly anticipated album, but ultimately the track was not included on the album. That same day during an interview with Billboard, she said the album would be released in November of that year. A remix for the single was released on October 26, 2018, and featured Kranium, HoodCelebrityy, and Stefflon Don.In September 2018, she announced that the debut single for her album "Go Awff" would be released at a later date. The song was eventually released on February 15, 2019. That same month, Kim was spotted in Barbados with fellow hip hop stars Mýa and Chilli, friends Char DeFrancesco (husband to Marc Jacobs and one of Kim's best friends) and Tiffany,  as well as  MTV personalities Pretty Vee and B. Simone from MTV's Wild 'n Out.It was later revealed that this was part of a VH1 reality show, Girls Cruise, for which Kim would serve as an executive producer. The show followed the group as they set sail to embark on a 10-day cruise in the Caribbean, visiting the countries of Barbados and Trinidad just in time for Carnival festivities. It also documented the group's bonding and new friendships with one another. The show premiered on July 15 with approximately 1.2 million viewers and ran for 11 episodes. It is unclear if there will be another season of the series.In March 2019, Kim revealed that her new album would be titled 9 and added "There's a lot of meaning behind that." Later that month, she announced that the album would be released on May 17, 2019. After a minor setback with her record label, eOne Music, that caused the album not be released on the original planned date, the project was postponed. On September 27, 2019, Kim released a second single, "Found You," featuring City Girls and O.T. Genasis. The album later became available for pre-order on all digital-download platforms on October 4, 2019 (along with the track "Pray For Me" featuring Rick Ross and Musiq Soulchild), with a release date of October 11, 2019.Upon its first week of release, the album charted on the R&B/Hip-Hop and Rap Album Sales, Digital Albums, Top Albums Sales, Independent Albums and Rap Album Sales. However, the album failed to chart on the Billboard 200 due to selling less than 1,000 copies, and no song from the album landed on the Hot 100 or Bubbling Under. During one of the reunion episodes for Girls Cruise, Kim revealed that the album would be a two-part project, stating "I recorded so many songs. I have a part one and a part two." She also shared that her co-star, the Instagram comedian Vena "Pretty Vee" Excell, would appear on the record.In October 2019, Kim revealed that she would collaborate with Missy Elliott and Paris Hilton on the follow-up to 9. In an interview with New York Radio 103.9, Kim confirmed that the City Girls would be involved with the follow-up to 9. She also stated that she would "love" to have Pretty Vee host her tour. On her November 8, 2019 appearance on The Real, Kim again confirmed that Paris Hilton and Missy Elliott would appear on 9's follow-up; she said the song "sounds like a classic Missy Elliott record but 'now.'"(1:20)


== Influences ==
Lil' Kim cited as her rap influences MC Lyte, Salt-N-Pepa and Roxanne Shanté. She was also influenced by Slick Rick, The Notorious B.I.G., Eric B. & Rakim, Queen Latifah and Mary J. Blige. Lil' Kim also cited Madonna as an influence, saying she modeled her own career on Madonna's, and labeling herself as the "Black Madonna."


== Products and endorsements ==
In 1998, Lil' Kim signed with Wilhelmina Models. That same year she was announced as the face for the fashion brand Candie's alongside Brandy. She became the first and only rapper to endorse the brand to date. In 2000, Lil' Kim signed a deal with fashion house Iceberg, and also with cosmetics brand MAC to help endorse their VIVA GLAM line of lipsticks and lip glosses alongside Mary J. Blige.The MAC VIVA GLAM III campaign, which was built around a plum-brown lipstick, helped raise $4 million for the company in one year and became the most successful VIVA GLAM campaign to date. Due to the success, the two signed on for a second year. The rapper also modeled for the urban fashion line Baby Phat in August 2000. In March 2001, Lil' Kim, along with several other artists, were in an Apple Mac computer commercial, demonstrating how to burn custom CDs on a Mac.In 2004 she launched a designer watch collection with manufacturer and jeweler Jeweler Jacob Arabo, Royalty by Lil' Kim. She also debuted her first clothing line, Hollyhood. She lent her voice to the video game Def Jam: Fight for NY, in which she was featured. In 2005 shecollaborated on a shoe line with high-end brand Petite Peton. That same year she appeared as a character in the limited-edition comic book "The Heist," a collaboration between Marvel and Atlantic Records.In August 2010, Lil' Kim signed a deal with Three Olives Vodka as the face for their Purple vodka. In September of that same year, she, along with her cousin Katrise Jones, opened their first beauty salon in Charlotte, North Carolina called Salon Se Swa. That same month she launched her second clothing line, 24/7 Goddess Collection, at Charlotte, North Carolina's Fashion Week. In November 2012, Lil' Kim began endorsing Cîroc vodka, revealing her own cocktail, "Queen Bee," and announcing herself as the "First Lady" of the brand.


== Philanthropy ==
In 2000, Lil' Kim embarked on a promo tour for her second studio album, The Notorious K.I.M., and the MAC AIDS Fund. She visited MAC cosmetics counters, interacted with fans, and helped raise money and awareness for people living with HIV/AIDS worldwide. She took part in MAC's Fashion Cares show in Toronto, Canada, raising close to one million for its AIDS committee. Her endorsement of MAC, with Mary J. Blige, raised $4 million for the fund.
In October 2001, Lil' Kim was featured on the R&B mix of the song "What's Going On." She, along with several other popular recording artists, released the song as "Artists Against AIDS Worldwide," with proceeds going to AIDS programs worldwide and also the September 11th Fund of the United Way. That same month, Lil' Kim performed at Breathe, a benefit concert for breast cancer research and treatment. Proceeds from the concert went to the UCLA Breast Center and the Breast Examination Center of Harlem, an outreach program of the Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center.On March 12, 2002, Lil' Kim walked her dogs in the 3rd annual "Paws for Style" fashion show. The event is held by Animal Fair magazine as a benefit for the Humane Society of New York. Items worn by the animals were later auctioned off online. In 2004 she launched her own foundation called Lil' Kim Cares. The foundation raises funds, resources and awareness for national programs that assist with issues such as homelessness, HIV/AIDS prevention and awareness, transitional living, child neglect, and violence against women.Speaking of the foundation, Lil' Kim stated she planned to be primarily involved in causes that had affected her personally. On April 17, 2004, she participated in the 28th annual Toyota Pro/Celebrity Race. The event helped raise more than $100,000 for "Racing for Kids," a non-profit program benefiting Southern California children's hospitals in Long Beach and Orange County. On August 24, 2004, Lil' Kim encouraged others to vote in the United States presidential election through the Rock the Vote campaign.On March 10, 2005, Lil' Kim, along with several other artists, appeared in an episode of The Apprentice. Each artist was approached by contestants to donate a "personal experience" to be auctioned off for charity through music channel Fuse's "Daily Download" program, with proceeds going to the Elizabeth Glaser Pediatric AIDS Foundation. In September 2005, she teamed with fashion designer Marc Jacobs for a limited edition T-shirt line featuring images of the rapper. Marc Jacobs Loves Lil' Kim was sold exclusively at Marc Jacobs stores, with 100% of the proceeds going to a charity called The Door.In 2005 Lil' Kim donated a diamond watch from her "Royalty" line to the World AIDS Day eBay auction, "Bid 2 Beat AIDS." Proceeds went to LIFEbeat, an organization providing HIV/AIDS information to millions of young people annually. Through her foundation, Lil' Kim has given back to many, including teaming up with apparel company Mitchell & Ness and boxer Zab Judah to donate toys to underprivileged youth in Philadelphia in 2005, and joining MusiCares in 2007 for a silent auction, held at the Grammys On The Hill ceremony, to help raise funds for the foundation.In 2007 Lil' Kim was a part of the 4th Annual Grammy Charity Holiday Auction, featuring a large variety of celebrity-signed memorabilia that people could bid on through eBay. On December 1, 2007, Lil' Kim partnered with Preserve Our Legacy and the New Jersey Stem Cell Research and Education Foundation to host a celebrity basketball game to raise awareness about various health issues plaguing minority communities.On July 11, 2010, Lil' Kim launched her signature milkshake, the "Queen Bee," at Millions of Milkshakes in West Hollywood, with proceeds going towards Wyclef Jean's Yéle Haiti Foundation. On February 9, 2013, she took part in the first annual Reality On The Runway fashion show. The event helped raise $300,000 for people infected with HIV/AIDS and increase awareness. All designs from the show were auctioned off online following the event, with a portion of the proceeds going to AIDS United.Lil' Kim has been a longtime LGBT advocate, and has participated in many gay pride festivals, including the LGBT Pride March in New York City, as well as performing at Atlanta Black Pride and D.C. Black Pride.


== Personal life ==
In her teens, Jones dated Shawn Powell. The pair met at the Empire Roller Skating rink in Brooklyn. After a couple of months of seeing each other, Powell was arrested for robbery and sentenced to eight and a half years in prison. Jones and Powell continued their relationship, with Jones visiting frequently. They kept in touch by writing letters. The couple became engaged while Powell was incarcerated.During this time, Jones met Christopher Wallace (The Notorious B.I.G.). She focused on starting her rap career and called off the engagement with Powell. In 1996, during the recording of her debut album, Jones became pregnant with Wallace's child. She did not make it public until 1999 during an interview with The Source. Jones decided to terminate the pregnancy. "I already knew the kind of relationship that Biggie and I had, and I knew that [having a child] was something that couldn't take place..."Wallace called Jones three days before his death and told her he loved her. In a 2010 interview with Ed Lover on Power 105, Jones revealed that Wallace assaulted her and she described an incident where he choked her to unconsciousness. In 2017, Jones admitted her relationship with Wallace was "very violent" after Jermaine Dupri claimed that he witnessed Wallace pull a pistol out on Jones.On July 23, 1996, Jones was arrested for possession of marijuana after police raided Wallace's Teaneck, New Jersey home. Police smelled marijuana inside the home when they went to ask for someone to move an illegally parked car. Jones denied she was smoking, claiming she was "upstairs all day sleeping." On March 17, 1999, Teaneck police issued an arrest warrant after Jones failed to turn up for court dates stemming from the arrest.The warrant was not a top priority for the police, and was not made public until September 2003, after a story was published online by The Smoking Gun. Jones was later removed from Teaneck's wanted list in October 2003, after $350 in bail was posted on her behalf. Jones' attorney told reporters that she did not appear in court because she believed the case had been resolved.In 2002, Jones started dating Damion "World" Hardy. The couple split in 2003, and she stated she was a victim of physical abuse leading to multiple nose jobs as a result of being punched.On June 20, 2003, Jones had $250,000 worth of jewelry stolen while catching a flight at New York's John F. Kennedy International Airport after a bag, which she intended to carry on, was mixed up with eight other pieces of her luggage. The missing jewelry was recovered 10 days later, found wrapped up in a rag in a locker room for airline employees by a United Airlines worker.In 2004, Jones dated record producer Scott Storch, whom she met when he offered her a ride to her hotel. The couple split after two months. In 2013, Storch revealed that he would have married Jones if the relationship had worked out. In 2007, Jones and Ray J briefly dated.On March 17, 2005, Lil' Kim was convicted of three counts of conspiracy and one count of perjury for lying to a federal grand jury about her and her friends' involvement in a 2001 shooting outside the Hot 97 studios in Manhattan. During the trial of her co-manager, Damion "D-Roc" Butler, and her bodyguard, Suif "Gutta" Jackson, a former member of the hip hop group Junior M.A.F.I.A., she testified before a grand jury that she did not know they were at the scene. However, video footage from a security camera placed all three at the scene, exiting the building.Butler and Jackson pleaded guilty to gun charges. Jackson was sentenced to twelve years in federal prison as part of plea bargain in which he admitted to firing at least twenty rounds during the incident. The length of the sentence was said to have been influenced by his previous gun-related convictions.In July 2005, Lil' Kim was sentenced to one year in prison, thirty days' home detention upon release from custody, and three years of probation. She served the entirety of her sentence at the Federal Detention Center, Philadelphia in Center City, Philadelphia. She was released on July 3, 2006, after serving approximately 12 months. Her Federal Bureau of Prisons (BOP) supervision ended on August 2, 2006.On June 9, 2014, Jones gave birth to a daughter.Jones identifies as a Christian.


== Feuds ==


=== Foxy Brown ===
Once high school friends, Lil' Kim and Foxy Brown originally remained close despite becoming associates of clashing hip hop groups Junior M.A.F.I.A. and The Firm, respectively. In 1995, they collaborated with Da Brat for the remix of  "No One Else" by Total. The following year, they were featured in the Hot 97 NY Fashion Show and appeared on the covers of The Source and Vibe. However, their first dispute developed after both of their debut studio albums were scheduled for release a week apart in November 1996.Media outlets noted similarities between the sleeve covers of Lil' Kim's Hard Core and Brown's Ill Na Na, where the two were shown wearing the same outfit. In 1997, the feud led to the deterioration of their friendship, and resulted in the cancellation of a collaborative album Thelma & Louise. Brown noted that the breakdown of their relationship was influenced by their conflicting entourages. They first attempted a reconciliation in 1998 after Lil' Kim called Brown and her mother after the two were held at gunpoint during a house burglary.In January 1999, critics noted the track "My Life" from Brown's second studio effort Chyna Doll as being an "open appeal" to their friendship. In the song, Brown describes their relationship being "lost for pride." Later in the album, however, Brown attacks "mistresses." As music journalist Evelyn McDonnell noted, this seemed pointed at Lil' Kim. Critics thought the records were a subtle diss to Lil' Kim, especially since during this time Brown had supported Lil' Kim's rival, Faith Evans, in multiple interviews. In February 1999, some music critics noted that Brown "suddenly sounded 'exactly' like Lil' Kim."In late May 1999, Lil' Cease's "Play Around," featuring Lil' Kim and Diddy, was released and featured on Cease's debut The Wonderful World of Cease A Leo. In the song, after Lil' Kim's guest rap, Diddy raps: "Stop trying to sound like her too bitches"; a diss aimed at Foxy. The line spurred enough controversy that a writer remarked, "It's finally coming out. Foxy Brown bites worse than a pit bull." Additionally, Lil' Kim's guest appearance on Mobb Deep's "Quiet Storm (Remix)" and her second album's title track, "The Notorious K.I.M.," were both released as diss records aimed at Foxy Brown.Angered by Lil' Kim's response, Brown collaborated with longtime associates Capone-N-Noreaga on the track, "Bang, Bang." In the track, Brown mimicked Lil' Kim's interpretation of MC Lyte's 10% Dis, and went on to recite: "You and Diddy y'all kill me with that subliminal shit." Towards the end of her verse, Brown attacked Lil' Kim's grieving for the loss of Biggie Smalls by remarking: "Let the nigga [Biggie] rest in peace, and hop off his dick, bitch do you."On February 26, 2001, at 3 p.m., as Lil' Kim left New York radio station Hot 97, over twenty shots were fired between two groups of three men. One of the men, Capone of Capone-N-Noreaga, was entering the Hot 97 building promote DJ Clue's new album, The Professional 2 (which happened to have also featured Lil' Kim). An affiliate, Efrain Ocasio from Capone's entourage, was shot in the back; both Lil' Kim's and Capone's groups denied any involvement in the shooting. However, detectives later informed The New York Daily News that it was a result of the verses Foxy Brown recited in "Bang, Bang."Shaken up by the incident, Brown tried to reach out to Lil' Kim for a truce. Brown stated, "I really don't know how it started. But Russell [Simmons] and I, we got together, and I said, 'Russell, I want to call a truce.' I want to have a sit-down with Kim. I don't care what it is. Let's just end it. We can even do a collaboration. We're bigger than this. If it has to start with me, let it start with me." Brown extended an olive branch to Lil' Kim's camp, however Lil' Kim had cut all ties with Diddy and Bad Boy associates and wanted no communication with Brown whatsoever. In March 2005, Lil' Kim was convicted of lying about the shooting to a federal grand jury. On July 6, 2005, she was sentenced to prison for three counts of perjury and one count of conspiracy.During the four years before Lil' Kim's sentencing, she and Brown exchanged subtle diss records, among them Lil' Kim's La Bella Mafia, "Quiet," and "Guess Who's Back"; and in turn, Brown's Ill Na Na 2: The Fever and various mixtape freestyles. In the midst of these diss recordings, Doug Banks interviewed Brown in 2003, hoping she would disclose further details pertaining to their dispute. Brown claimed that Lil' Kim was allegedly jealous that Biggie was to include Brown in his Junior M.A.F.I.A. collective. Brown also added that a tell-all book disclosing the feud would be released for Christmas 2003. In her final comments on the dispute, Brown stated: "Kim is the only female artist that keeps me on my toes. She's the only one that I can look at; and any other artist that says they don't have that one person that keeps them driven... is lying."Following her release from prison, Lil' Kim no longer acknowledged Brown. Brown, on the other hand, has consistently targeted Lil' Kim in her music and concert venues since the latter's prison release.On May 17, 2012, Lil' Kim gave an interview to a radio show, The Breakfast Club. When asked about whether or not she had spoken to Brown at all in recent years, she replied, "I don't even know her. And when I say that; I don't know who she is to these days. I wouldn't even know what her voice sounds like."


=== Nicki Minaj ===
Lil' Kim has been embroiled in a feud with fellow rapper Nicki Minaj since Minaj's success with Pink Friday. With Lil' Kim and media critics noticing resemblances with her on the Sucka Free mixtape, Lil' Kim accused Minaj of copying her image saying, "If you are going to steal my swag, you gonna have to pay. Something gotta give. You help me, I help you. That's how it goes to me." Minaj's single "Roman's Revenge" with Eminem was believed by critics to be a response to Lil' Kim's comments, although at the time she denied this.Minaj responded to the situation in an interview on The Angie Martinez show, saying "She picked a fight with Foxy, then she picked a fight with Eve, then she picked a fight with Remy, then it was Mrs. Wallace, then it was Nicki Minaj. Every time you in the news, it's 'cause you gettin' at somebody! Where's your music? Put your music out, and when I see your name on Billboard, that's when I'll respond to you. Other than that, goodbye. It's Barbie, bitch."Lil' Kim reignited the feud following the release of her mixtape Black Friday, an album that directly referenced Nicki Minaj, via her debut album title and freestyling on Minaj's songs such as "Did It On'em" (that became "Pissin' On'em"). The mixtape cover featured artwork that showed Lil' Kim decapitating Minaj with a sword. A fragment of Minaj's diss track "Tragedy" was released online in April 2011, featuring lyrics "Pink Friday, Eminem, 8 Mile/ It must hurt to sell your album on PayPal." Following the release of Minaj's second album, Pink Friday: Roman Reloaded, critics suggested that the tracks "Stupid Hoe" may have contained attacks at Lil' Kim. Lil' Kim later suggested in an interview with Power105's Breakfast Club that the song "Automatic" from Minaj's second album was similar to her unreleased material, also calling Minaj "obnoxious" and "catty."In a 2018 interview with Genius, Minaj alluded to the situation with Lil' Kim, seemingly confirming that the track "Roman's Revenge" was about the feud, saying, "Someone got at me. A veteran got at me, and I hit them with 'Roman's Revenge' and then I kept on going." In 2021, Lil' Kim stated on the red carpet of the BET Awards that she would like to do a Verzuz with Minaj.


== Legacy ==
 Several media outlets have referred to Lil' Kim as the "Queen of Rap," and by the alias she uses, "Queen Bee." Newsweek has called her the "First Lady of Rap," with editor Allison Samuels writing in 2000 that she has "transcended the male-dominated world of rap to become one of America's sassiest, most engaging icons."Lil' Kim's music catalog features undertones of sex-positive feminism and the importance of female pleasure, instead of the man as the "dominant priority," through explicit lyrics about sex. Dazed considered her "the first high-profile female rapper to flip the script on female objectification in the rap industry." For NME's editor Jordan Bassett, she "out-filthed the male rappers at every turn."According to BBC News, Hard Core (1996) was the most successful debut album by a female hip hop artist at the time; the album saw her "inhabit the territory of sexual edginess and hardcore rap, traditionally the preserve inhabited by male artists." In 2000, Los Angeles Times writer Isaac Guzman wrote that her debut solo album created a path for a new wave of female rappers, with her at the forefront of her generation, and established her as "the raunchiest, hardest, sexiest, most glamorous woman in all of hip-hop."During that time, several new female hip hop artists modeled themselves after her stylistically. Placing Hard Core at number 80 on their list of "Best Rap Albums of the 90s," Complex magazine stated, "when Lil Kim released her debut album—women in hip-hop finally had options, paths to follow and models [...] she was the raunchiest woman you ever heard on the mic." The Village Voice writer Joan Morgan contended that the album "transformed her into a cultural icon," opining that it put an emphasis on sex appeal, looks, and packaging as a priority for female rappers. Camera Obscura listed her as one of the late twentieth-century "self-marketers of female trouble" in music, along with Janet Jackson and Tina Turner.Aside from music, Lil' Kim is also known for a risk-taking and luxurious approach to fashion that has inspired many artists. She has been named as a fashion icon by various media outlets. Vogue editor-at-large André Leon Talley called her "the black Madonna." Designers such as Marc Jacobs, Versace, and Giorgio Armani have credited Lil' Kim as an inspiration. In 2020, XXL wrote that "twenty-five years later, no rapper is more influential to the new female rhymers."Some artists who have named Kim as influence include Rihanna, Cardi B, Megan Thee Stallion, Kash Doll, Bree Runway, Teyana Taylor, Doja Cat, Rosalía, Hitmaka, Casanova, Spice, Zaytoven, Stefflon Don, Flo Milli, Nicki Minaj, Ivorian Doll, Cupcakke, Saweetie, Ice Spice, Miley Cyrus, Iggy Azalea, Ms Banks, Kash Doll, Jhené Aiko, City Girls and Erica Banks. Actress Taraji P. Henson said that Lil' Kim inspired her portrayal of Empire character Cookie Lyon.


== Awards and nominations ==

Throughout her career, Lil' Kim has earned numerous honors and awards. Her debut Hard Core was certified double platinum by the RIAA, and is considered a classic hip-hop album. As of 2007, Lil' Kim has sold over 15 million albums worldwide. Her songs "No Time," "Big Momma Thang" and "Ladies Night" were listed on Complex Magazine's "The 50 Best Rap Songs By Women," at number 24,  13, and 7, respectively. Her song "Lady Marmalade" with Pink, Christina Aguilera, and Mýa, is one of the best-selling singles of all time worldwide, with sales of over 5.1 million worldwide. Lady Marmalade went number one on the US Billboard Hot 100, making her one of only a few female rappers to have a number one on that chart. The song won a 2002 Grammy Award in the category of "Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals."
Lil' Kim was ranked as one of the top 50 greatest MCs of all time in Kool Moe Dee's 2003 book, There's a God on the Mic. In 2012, Lil' Kim was honorably listed on VH1's "100 Greatest Women In Music" at number 45, placing her in the fourth highest position for a female rapper. In 2014, she was included in Billboard's list of the "31 Female Rappers Who Changed Hip-Hop." In 2016, VH1 honored Lil' Kim with VH1 Hip-Hop Honors and WEEN Award honored Kim with Icon Award because of her contribution to hip hop.
In June 2018, Lil' Kim was honored with a proclamation by the New York City Council's Black, Latino, and Asian Caucus (BLAC) as part of the annual African-American Music Appreciation Month for her contributions to hip-hop. Along with the proclamation, she also accepted the New York City 12th Council District Arts and Music Award and the city's Power Of Influence Award. In 2019, Lil' Kim was honored by BET Hip Hop Awards with the I Am Hip Hop Award.


== Discography ==

Studio albums

Hard Core (1996)
The Notorious K.I.M. (2000)
La Bella Mafia (2003)
The Naked Truth (2005)
9 (2019)Collaboration albums

Conspiracy with Junior M.A.F.I.A. (1995)


== Tours ==
Headlining

The Notorious K.I.M. Tour (2000)
2010 Tour (2010)
Return of the Queen Tour (2012)Joint tours

No Way Out Tour (with Puff Daddy & The Family) (1997–1998)
Winterbeatz Australia (with Fabolous, Mario, 50 Cent and G-Unit) (2011)
Bad Boy Family Reunion Tour  (2016)


== Filmography ==


=== Film ===


=== Television ===


=== Music videos ===


=== Video games ===


=== Documentary ===


== See also ==
Honorific nicknames in popular music
List of artists who reached number one in the United States
List of Billboard Hot 100 number-one singles of 2001
Billboard Year-End Hot 100 singles of 2001


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Hope, Clover (2021). The Motherlode: 100+ Women Who Made Hip-Hop. Harry N. Abrams. ISBN 978-1-4197-4296-5.


== External links ==
Official website
Lil' Kim at IMDb
Lil' Kim discography at DiscogsLin Que Ayoung, known professionally as Lin Que and formerly as Isis, is a female hip-hop artist.


== Biography ==
Lin Que graduated from Cathedral High School in Manhattan. She released her debut album Rebel Soul under the name Isis while affiliated with X-Clan in 1990. She was a member of the hip-hop collective known as the Blackwatch Movement (which included X Clan). On Billboard.com, Andy Kellman Rovi believed that since Professor X took the mic after almost every verse, it was an X-Clan album in every sense but the name. According to an AllMusic Review by Alex Henderson, Isis "showed a lot of potential on Rebel Soul, which proves that her rapping skills were strong and that her technique was excellent."
Lin Que left X-Clan and later began to work with MC Lyte. Now rhyming under her birth name Lin Que, and released a couple of singles for Ruffhouse/Columbia Records and EastWest Records America. She eventually went into A&R work and graphic design, and she appeared briefly in Juice, Ted Demme's Who's the Man? and Spike Lee's He Got Game.She collaborated with various artists such as Will Downing, Mary J. Blige, Queen Latifah, MC Lyte, Steele of Smif-N-Wessun, The Beatnuts, Monifah, Ce Ce Peniston, Joi Cardwell, and more.
She had a brief stint as a member of the Wu-Tang Clan-affiliated group Deadly Venoms. In Billboard Magazine Vol. 110, No. 8, the all female group planned "to function as a female collective independent of any male overseers." After leaving the group for business reasons shortly after its debut album was recorded and never released, she remained writing and creating music with producers Sugar Al Cayne, Azteknique, and Ayatollah. She has written for MC Lyte and has been producing music as well.
Lin Que released an album titled GODspeed in 2007.In 2011, Lin Que decided to go back to college. She majored in Film at Hunter College. At Hunter, she became a two-time winner of the British Academy of Film and Television Arts New York Scholarship. In the fall of 2015, Lin Que was accepted into the NYU Tisch School of the Arts Graduate Film Program. She graduated from NYU with a concentration in Writing & Directing in May 2020.


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===
Rebel Soul, 4th & B’way/Island Records 444 030 (North America) / 848 438 (international), 1990
GODspeed, UniverseWorks (self-released), 2007


=== Singles ===
"Rebel Soul", 4th & B'way/Island Records, 1990
"The Power of Myself Is Moving", 4th & B'way/Island Records, 1991
"This Is It" b/w "Rip It Up", Ruffhouse/Columbia Records, 1993
"Let It Fall" b/w "Parley", EastWest Records America, 1995


== References ==


== External links ==
Interview in Insomniac magazine
BritishHipHop.co.uk InterviewBrandon Jermaine Yun, better known by his stage name EXP (pronounced "e-ex-pee"), formerly EX-PLICIT LINEZ, is an  American rapper and former radio personality for New York Korean radio NYKR 1660 AM, a mutual protégé of Drunken Tiger and Lee Hyun Do a.k.a. D.O. EXP first appeared on the underground rap scene in The Bronx in the mid 1990s on a DJ Platinum's mixtape series, Hate in Da Blood. He is one of the first generation of Asian American rappers to be involved in the Hip-Hop scene along with Jamez, John "shogunna" Chee and Mountain Brothers. He is also known as one of the first Korean rappers to mix Korean and English words to rhyme in the song. He is of Korean descent.
Aside from releasing multiple mixtapes that gained heavy rotations in college radio stations and internet radios, EXP has gained notoriety for involvement in feuds with other Korean artists.


== Music career ==
He became a member of The Movement in 2001. In 2007 he released his first United States radio single, Like That, which was produced by former member of (DEUX), Lee Hyun Do a.k.a. D.O. The single received spins throughout Atlanta radio stations. In addition to his solo works, EXP made numerous guest appearances internationally throughout Japan, China, France and Philippine.
EXP's Supreme Hustle set a record for most downloaded Hip Hop album in Chinese music sites in 2005.In 2007, prior to releasing his 7th album, Rebirth of YSJ, Yoo Seung-jun showed interest in working with EXP, whom expressed his interest in making music in China.EXP was briefly signed to Tiger JK's Jungle Entertainment in 2008 and Warner Music Korea under D.O from Deux. In 2010, Lee Hyun Do a.k.a. D.O. announced that he was producing for EXP. He also worked with K-Pop producer Seung Wook Yang (Producer of Click-B's Oh Jong Hyuk and ezllife)
In December 2010, EXP became Urban A&R at S.M. Entertainment and Mnet (Korea) affiliate, MarCan Entertainment. He left the company due to mutual Differences.EXP recorded an entrance song "Baki's Theme" for Korean MMA Fighter Won sik "Parky" Park  for his bout against Kosuke Umeda. Park lost the bout via Unanimous Decision.
In 2014, EXP coached and prepared Sang A Yim-Propp for her performance on SBS Channel's Thanksgiving special show "Yul chang Club Some-Sing".


== The Movement ==
EXP is part of The Movement, which is a hip hop collective formed by Korean American hip hop group Drunken Tiger and Dynamic Duo/CB Mass.

Drunken Tiger
Dynamic Duo/CB Mass
T
Eun Ji Won
Epik High
Yang Dong-geun
Leessang
Bobby Kim
Bizzy
Sean2Slow
Double K
TBNY
Ex-plicit Linez
Dok2
Roscoe Umali
Mickey Eyez
MNOVA
Buga Kingz


== Personal life ==
In 2009, EXP supported and performed for Relay for Life (American Cancer Society) event in East Village, New York.
EXP is a fan of Mixed Martial Arts. He is a practitioner of Russian Martial Arts Sambo (martial art) and holds 5th Dan (Godan) Black belt in Aikido.
In July 2014, EXP announced his involvement in upcoming horror movie Vamp Bikers DOS. The movie also featured Melle Mel and Grandmaster Caz.
In October 2018, EXP announced his acting appearance in Amazon Original produced Japanese Borscht  Remake with distribution by Sony. He also appears on the original soundtrack for the film.
In November 2020, EXP launched a clothing company, Thick Bad Wolf.EXP also has hinted a return to the music scene from long hiatus.


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===
a Promise and a Threat by Bando Korea (1997)
Black Magic (Unreleased) by Warner Music (2011)
Tredecim (1996-2009) Underground Hits Collection by OTM Records (2019)


=== Mixtapes ===
Imperial Vol. 1 (2003)
Black Suede Records Presents: Supreme Hustle (2005)
Black Suede Records Presents: Supreme Hustle (Chinese Version) (2005)
Back 2 Basics (2008)
Back 2 Basics: 22k Edition (2009)


== Filmography ==
2006: Japanese borscht (Suspense Drama) (as Americanized Yakuza)
2009: Independent Director's Sorrow (Drama) (Cameo)
2013: 36 (Thriller) (as Sheldon Yi)
2014: Anemone (Drama) (Choreographer)
2015: Vamp Birkers DOS (Horror Action) (Action Choreographer) 
2016: ZomBikers (Horror Action) (Action Choreographer)(Cameo) 
2019: Japanese Borscht Remake (as Xioshi the Americanized Yakuza) 


== References ==


== External links ==
Partial Album Discography (English)
Official Drunken Tiger Homepage USA (English)
NYU DJ Shine Interview (English)
"Korean Rap Beefs". Soompi Forums. Retrieved 19 April 2018.
NYU GenerAsian Magazine (English)
Popular NY rapper headlines Asian Hip Hop Summit in LA (English)
Japanese MC Crazy T recruits underground giants for his debut LP (Japanese)
Masta Wu Disses Drunken TigerDusty Locane (often stylized in all uppercase as DUSTY LOCANE; also known as Reginald Miot. Born June 11, 1999) is an American rapper from Brooklyn, New York. He began gaining recognition in 2020 and 2021 when his singles "Rollin n Controllin Freestyle" and "Rolando (Caught in the Rain)" began getting popular on various social media platforms, most notably TikTok. He has been noted by Billboard for his "raspy, drill sound," and by Pitchfork, who called "Rolando (Caught in the Rain)" a "must-hear" rap song.


== Early and personal life ==
Dusty Locane was raised in "a good home," not "subjected to the harsh realities of living in the hood," in Canarsie, Brooklyn, New York. His father is Haitian and his mother is Trinidadian, which led to him listening to soca music as a child, in addition to hip hop and R&B. He attended college for a year before getting expelled and initially wanted to pursue a career in basketball. He then spent some time in jail, and started considering a music career seriously upon being released. He is affiliated with the Rollin' 60s Neighborhood Crips. The rapper has three children, a son born on March 23, 2022, a daughter born June 11, 2022, and another son born in August 2022.


== Career ==
As of August 2023 he has released two albums, two collaborative albums, one mixtape, two extended plays and 28 singles (including 13 as a featured artist).
Dusty Locane released his debut single, "Rollin n Controllin Freestyle", on August 7, 2020. On January 8, 2021, DJ Akademiks posted two videos of Locane rapping to his millions of followers on Instagram, thus introducing him to new listeners. By December 2021, the song had 200 million streams and was certified gold by the RIAA.Dusty Locane announced that his debut album, Untamed, was to be released on November 19, 2021. The album was postponed, however, out of respect for rapper Young Dolph, who was murdered on November 17. It was finally released on December 3, 2021. The album contained 20 songs and was generally received rather positively by critics. The album was supported by 6 singles and featured guest appearances from OMB Jaydee, 3Kizzy, Yung Bleu, 8ANDITT, Rah Swish and KG MORE BREESH.
On September 2, 2022 Dusty Locane released a 7 track EP titled Rollin N Controllin. The EP featured the singles "Rollin n Controllin Freestyle", "Rolando (Caught in the Rain)", "Rollin n Controllin, Pt. 2 (Picture Me)" and "Rollin N Contollin, Pt.3 (Been Rollin)". The EP featured a sole appearance from Kajun Waters. 
On September 23, 2022 Dusty Locane released a collaboration album alongside fellow rappers Ron Suno, Rah Swish and OnPointLikeOP titled Say Dat. The album contained 8 songs.
On October 31, 2022 Dusty Locane released an album titled Nightmare On Da Fifth. The album was supported by the single "Cremate (Run Outta Lucc)" which featured Stelly Hundo, OMB Jay Dee and 3Kizzy. The album featured 15 songs and guest appearances from 3Kizzy, Kajun Waters, SFIV5, TaTa, Stelly Hundo and OMB Jay Dee. 3 of the albums songs were released on previous Dusty Locane projects such as "PRESSURE" and "ROLANDO 2 (Catch The Rain)" both coming from Rollin N Controllin and "WAY BACC" coming from Say Dat.
On December 5, 2022 Dusty Locane released an EP titled Catch Da Flu. The EP featured 6 songs.


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===


=== Collaborative albums ===


=== Mixtapes ===


=== EPs ===


=== Singles ===


==== As lead artist ====


==== As featured artist ====


=== Guest appearances ===


== References ==Nicholas Gerard Loftin, professionally known by his moniker as Nick Fury (or simply Fury), is an American hip hop record producer. He is known for producing Houston-based rapper Lil' Flip's 2004 hit single "Game Over (Flip)", which peaked at number 15 in the US Billboard Hot 100 and was certified Platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America for selling 1,000,000 copies in the United States alone.
In January 1996, Loftin relocated to Atlanta, Georgia to produce soul, hip hop and R&B music. He has produced for a variety of high-profile artists, including Lil' Kim, Wu-Tang Clan, T.I., E-40, Nick Cannon and Trina, and remixed "One Love" and "It Ain't Hard to Tell" for Nas' 10th anniversary edition of highly praised Illmatic album. He contributed to soundtracks to 2001 films The Fast and the Furious and Osmosis Jones, and 2005 film The Longest Yard.
In 2014, Loftin, together with Fadale Northan and Frisco Rivera, produced the theme music and instrumentals for the former world champion boxer Willy Wise workout DVD, W3P: Willy Wise Workout - 3 Degrees of Power.


== Discography ==
"Mr. Untouchable" and "Come At Me" by King Sun from Say No More (1999)
"This Is It" by Supreme C (2000) - prod. w/ Sedeck
"Custom Made (Give It to You)" by Lil' Kim from The Notorious K.I.M. (2000) - co-prod. by Daniel Glogower
"Hustlin'" by Fat Joe from The Fast and the Furious: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack (2001)
"Rider Like Me" by Ezekiel Lewis from Music From the Motion Picture Osmosis Jones (2001) - prod. w/ Ezekiel Lewis, Mary Brown & Verse 1
"One of These Days" by Wu-Tang Clan from Iron Flag (2001)
"I Still Luv You" by T.I. from Trap Muzik (2003)
"That's A Good Look 4 U" by E-40 from Breakin' News (2003)
"My Mic" by Nick Cannon and Biz Markie from Nick Cannon (2003)
"Game Over (Flip)" by Lil' Flip from U Gotta Feel Me (2004)
"Tha King" by T.I. from Urban Legend (2004)
"One Love (Remix)" and "It Ain't Hard to Tell (Remix)" by Nas from 10 Year Anniversary Illmatic Platinum Series (2004)
"Bounce Like This" by T.I. from Music From and Inspired By the Motion Picture The Longest Yard (2005)
"Sunshine to the Rain" by Miri Ben-Ari, Scarface and Anthony Hamilton from The Hip-Hop Violinist (2005) - prod. w/ Miri Ben-Ari
"Reach Out" by Trina from Glamorest Life (2005) - co-prod. by Mike Caren
"I'm Straight" by T.I., B.G. and Young Jeezy from King. (2006)
"Murda" by P.C., Polite, Stumik and Hands from Raekwon Presents Icewater: Polluted Water (2007)
"Entertainers" by Young Zee from The Album I Had When I Was Supposed To Sign To Shady! (2009)
"In My Zone" by Stevie Stone from 2 Birds 1 Stone (2013) - prod. w/ Foss Weirdo


== References ==Lee Jason Kilber, known professionally as DJ Logic (born 1972), is an American turntablist active primarily in nu-jazz/acid jazz and with jam bands.
Kibler was born and raised in The Bronx, NY. Because of an early interest in hip hop, Kibler started using the turntables, practicing often. Kibler was also interested in funk and jazz music and began collaborating with various musicians. His own recordings are perhaps best described as contemporary soul jazz with a strong hip hop feel.
Kibler often tours with his own group, Project Logic, and has recorded or performed with Vernon Reid, moe., John Mayer, Medeski Martin & Wood, Bob Belden, Jack Johnson, Chris Whitley, Uri Caine, Christian McBride and others. On September 10 2001, Project Logic performed the final official show at Wetlands Preserve before the closing of the venue (this performance featured special guests Warren Haynes of The Allman Brothers Band and Gov't Mule, Stanley Jordan and Mike Gordon).  On April 6 2006, Kibler sat in with Bob Weir's Ratdog, adding his style to the famous Grateful Dead song combo "China Cat Sunflower/I Know You Rider". He is a founding member of The John Popper Project. On August 15, 2009, Kibler sat in with O.A.R. at Madison Square Garden, adding his style to their latest single "This Town".
Jason Kiblers mentor had always been Vernon Reid, and the twosome recorded and toured occasionally as the “Yohimbe Brothers” with various guests. Kibler has appeared on studio and live performances with Reid's solo projects; Reid also did a guest solo on one track from Kibler's original band, Eye and I, which also featured D.K. Dyson and Melvin Gibbs, the latter of whom has played on all of the DJ Logic solo releases as well.


== Discography ==


=== Rise and Shine Remixes (2011) ===
Sierra Leone's Refugee All Stars Meet DJ Logic
Released by Combacha
Track list

Muloma Remix
Jah Come Down Remix
Jah Mercy Remix
Global Threat Remix
But Vange Remix


=== Zen of Logic (2006) ===
DJ Logic
Released by Ropeadope Records
Track list

Peace Y'All (I am in the House)
9th Ward Blues
Balifon Planet
Hypnotic
Interlude #1
Simmer Slow
Afro Beat
One Time
Something Distant
Hope Road
Smackness
Interlude #2
Rat Pack
Holding Down


=== The John Popper Project (2004) ===
The John Popper Project
Released by Relix Records
Track list

Lapdance
Everything
All Good Children
In The Midst
Fire In Her Kiss
Louisiana Sky
Trigger
Horses
Took
Morning Light
Open Hand
Show Me
Pack Your Love


=== Longitude (2004) ===
Groundtruther
Released by Thirsty Ear Recordings
Track list

Transit of Venus
Tycho Brahe
March 1741, Cape Horn
Course Made Good
Dead Reckoning
Medicean Stars
Jupiter Mask
H-4
Back Quadrant
Epherimedes
Prime Meridian
South Heading


=== The Tao of Yo (2004) ===
Yohimbe Brothers
Released by Thirsty Ear Recordings
Track list

Shine For Me
The Secret Frequency
More From Life
Shape 4
Noh Rio
TV
30 Spokes
Unimportance
No Pistolas
Overcoming
Words They Use
Shape 1
Perfect Traveller


=== Front End Lifter (2002) ===
Yohimbe Brothers
Released by Ropeadope Records
Track list

Ponk
Tenemental
6996-Club-Vohimbe
Psychopathia Mojosexualis
Welcome 2 The Freq Show
Smoke and Dust Dub Version
The Big Pill
Bamalamb
Transmission XXX
Just A Little Screwy
Invitation To A Situation
Prelude To A Diss
Innerspin (A Tone Hymn)
The Callipygiac Caldonians
That Obscure Object of Desire


=== The Anomaly (2001) ===
DJ Logic
Released by Ropeadope Records
Track list

French Quarter
Black Buddah
Ron’s House
Michelle
Frequency One
Tih Gnob
Bean-E-Man
Who Am I?
Soul-Kissing
Afronautical
The Project(s)
Hip-Hopera
An Interlude
Miles Away
Drone


=== Project Logic (1999) ===
DJ Logic
Released by Ropeadope Records
Track list

Intro
Shea’s Groove
Abyss
Eyes Open (But Dead)
Mnemonics
Interlude 1
Flat As Aboard
Gig 1
Interlude 2
Una Cosa Buena
Bag of Tricks
J.J. Bailey
Two Different Places
Spider Dance
Interlude 3
Bruckner Boulevard
Kinda Bleu


=== Appearances ===
With Wallace Roney

Prototype (HighNote, 2004)With Christian McBride

Live at Tonic (Ropeadope, 2006)


== References ==


== External links ==
Official site
An interview with DJ Logic
DJ Logic collection at the Internet Archive's live music archive
For No One In Particular on Amulet
Video interview with DJ Logic at allaboutjazz.comSean Divine Jacobs (born September 30, 1974), better known as Sheek Louch (or simpy Sheek), is an American rapper best known as a member of The LOX and founder of D-Block Records, along with Styles P and Jadakiss.


== Personal life and career ==
At around the age of 12, he was inspired to rhyme by his friend Jason Phillips (Jadakiss). He and Jason would later form The LOX with Styles P. Mary J. Blige "discovered" the trio, and they would soon be signed to Sean Combs's Bad Boy Records. Their first album, Money, Power & Respect, was released on January 13, 1998.Sheek and his fellow LOX members later parted ways with Bad Boy Records, and signed a record deal with their management company, Ruff Ryders, after the company formed a record label in the late 1990s. Ruff Ryders was also home to DMX. The group's second album, We Are the Streets, was released on January 25, 2000. Meanwhile, Sheek, an aspiring entrepreneur, began working on their D-Block brand, building a studio, and looking for new talent to join their roster. In October 2006 he opened a D-Block car wash and gas station in their hometown of Yonkers, New York.Sheek released his solo debut Walk Witt Me on Universal Records through D-Block Records. Early promotional material, such as within the liner notes of Styles P's album A Gangster and a Gentleman, indicate that the album's original title was Walk With Me. His fifth album, Silverback Gorilla, released in 2008, featured his hit single, "Good Love", which sampled Betty Wright's "Tonight Is The Night" and "Pure Love" songs.
He was also featured on an episode of World's Wildest Police Videos, which demonstrated his notorious past.He has worked somewhat prolifically with Ghostface Killah. They collaborated on a joint album titled Wu Block featuring members of Wu-Tang Clan and D-Block after drawing inspiration from one another while touring and recording. In January 2017 Ghostface and Sheek Louch announced on their respective social media accounts that a second collaborative album was in the works.


== Discography ==

Studio albumsWalk witt Me (2003)
After Taxes (2005)
Silverback Gorilla (2008)
Life on D-Block (2009)
Donnie G: Don Gorilla (2010)
Silverback Gorilla 2 (2015)Collaboration albumsWu Block (with Ghostface Killah)  (2012)


== References ==Louis Dorley (born December 22, 1974), better known as Louis Logic, is a Brooklyn, New York–based underground hip-hop emcee. He has released three full-length studio albums as a solo artist and one album as The Odd Couple with Jay Love, and is a former member of the Demigodz, appearing on a number of tracks on the Godz Must Be Crazy EP. In 2006, he made his arrangement with longtime producer J.J. Brown official. Their last album together was released under the artist name "Louis Logic & J.J. Brown."


== History ==
He first became interested in hip-hop at the age of eleven when he was exposed to U.T.F.O.'s hit "Roxanne, Roxanne". By his own admission, lyrical talent did not come naturally to him, and he has cited Vinnie Paz (formerly Ikon the Verbal Hologram) of Jedi Mind Tricks for the name which has become Logic's moniker, 'The Drunken Dragon.' In 2002, the Demigodz The Godz Must Be Crazy EP was released, featuring Logic on a number of tracks.
Louis Logic's solo career took off in 2003 with the release of Sin-A-Matic, which was met with critical acclaim and widespread underground success. In 2004 he withdrew from the Demigodz, citing that his association with the group was overshadowing his solo career, and the fact that his music was developing in a very different direction from the style which made him comfortable with the Godz, who generally value traditional battle-style rhyming over innovation. However, in 2005 Louis Logic made an appearance on long time Demigodz affiliate Majik Most's debut album "Molesting HipHop (released on Domination Recordings). The song entitled "Chicks Don't Mind" was produced by JJ Brown - Logic's primary producer and close friend.
Although he released Alcohol/Ism later that year as The Odd Couple with Jay Love, his departure from the Demigodz also marked a retreat from collaborative work. His 2006 album with J.J. Brown, Misery Loves Comedy features no cameos at all by other rappers, although a singer was brought in for one track. Misery Loves Comedy was Logic's first release on his new label, Fatbeats Records.
In September 2006, Louis and J.J. released their first music video for the single "The Great Divide." The video was directed by Jed I. Rosenberg.
Louis then worked on a project with Danish producers Laust Jeppesen and Rolf Hede entitled "Spork Kills". It was a total departure from his previous work, fusing 60's surf rock with hip hop, as he had expressed his displeasure with the "underground" hip-hop scene and labels. Spork Kills' first single was "Night of the Hip N Dead." The video was directed by Donlee Brussel. It premiered on mtvU.
In 2013, he revealed he was working on his first new louis logic album since 2006's Misery Loves Comedy in Copenhagen. The album was called Look on the Blight Side and was released in November 2013 on Fake Four Inc.  This project was completely self-produced, featuring several artists on various instruments. After many years of hip hop releases, studying and implementing voice and piano along the way, Louis moved on to working exclusively on electronic indie – pop singer/songwriter music and broke a three-year silence with the release of a new collaborative band project with Minneapolis rapper/producer and longtime tourmate ECID called TOYFRiEND. Their debut EP Foolhearty was self-released in December 2017.
In late 2017, Louis revealed on Instagram that he had "been getting a lot of "thought you were dead" messages lately, for the last 3 years" as an announcement to his new creative direction TOYFRiEND following his long period of activity under the handle Louis Logic. Soon after, Dorley updated his Instagram bio to include "once upon a time, i was louis logic. TOYFRiEND" and further updated his Twitter bio to state "pka Louis Logic" (previously known as). Louis "Logic" continues to release music in part with his friend ECID under the new band label.


== Discography ==
Studio albumsSin-A-Matic (Solid Records, 2003)
Misery Loves Comedy (Fat Beats, 2006)
Look on the Blight Side (Fake Four Inc., 2013)CollaborationsThe Godz Must Be Crazy [EP] (2002) (with The Demigodz)
Alcohol/Ism (Brick, 2004) (with Jay Love, as The Odd Couple)
Beaches Love Us [EP] (See the CHeetah!, 2009) (with Spork Kills)Compilations and mixtapesMusic to Drink By: A Collection of Loosies & Exclusives (2000)
Debacle in a Bottle: A Not Album (2002)
Blame It on the Hooch (2004)
Blame It on the Hooch .2 (2005)
Me & Everyone You Know (2010)


== References ==


== External links ==
Official Facebook Page
"Louis Logic: More Than Rap"  Interview in MVRemix Urban, September 2008James Roberts (born February 12, 1963), better known as Ed Lover, is an American deejay, radio personality, actor, musician,  and former MTV VJ. He hosted "The Ed Lover Show" on SiriusXM's old-school hip hop station BackSpin. As of April 12, 2018, he hosts the morning show at classic hip-hop "104.3 Jams" WBMX in Chicago.He is also widely recognized for being the first person to announce Tupac Shakur's death at a Nas concert in 1996.


== Biography ==


=== Pre-MTV history ===
Roberts was born in Brooklyn, New York.  Before reaching fame on MTV, he was part of an eccentric and deliberately enigmatic hip hop collective called No Face, primarily with fellow members Kevon Shah and Mark "Mark Sexx" Skeete, who served as the main producer. No Face debuted in 1989 on Island Records' Club music imprint Great Jones with its only known recording for the label, "Hump Music"—an underground sexually explicit parody of The Jungle Brothers' 1988 hip-house classic "I'll House You."  No Face would continue recording for another five years, but it only released one album in 1990, Wake Your Daughter Up on its own No Face label, which was operated as an imprint of the Rush Associated Labels division of Def Jam Recordings.
Though Ed Lover was clearly recognizable throughout parts of the album, his name was not credited on the album and he was not featured on any album or single covers during this period, thus rendering Ed Lover the "no face" part of the group. Its main logo featured two heads with the word "face" written in graffiti-style' at the bottom of the right face, while the official label logo featured three heads with the word "face" in a more legible font.
Wake Your Daughter Up spawned two singles—"Fake-Hair-Wearin' Bitch," an underground cult classic that sampled The Gap Band's "You Dropped a Bomb on Me" and featured the 2 Live Crew, and "Half," an R&B-styled divorce tale that featured the up-and-coming hardcore female hip-hop duo BWP (Bytches with Problems), which was discovered by and recorded for No Face to a slightly bigger level of success for the label than the group No Face did. Ed Lover is featured in the video for "Half," which regularly aired on Yo! MTV Raps during his tenure as co-host.
For reasons unknown, other than possibly to avoid conflicting with his duties on MTV, Ed Lover left No Face shortly after its time with RAL. His swan song to the group and to the label was his cameo appearance with partner Doctor Dré in BWP's video of its third single, "Wanted," from its one and only album, The Bytches from 1991.


=== Yo! MTV Raps ===
Roberts is best known for saying "C'mon, son!" and being the co-host of the weekday version of MTV's hip hop music specialty program Yo! MTV Raps Today with partner André "Doctor Dré" Brown. (The main weekend version was hosted by hip hop pioneer "Fab Five Freddy" Brathwaite) On Yo! MTV Raps Today, Ed created his own dance called the Ed Lover Dance that became somewhat popular in the 1990s and was performed to the track "The 900 Number" by DJ Mark the 45 King.
He appeared as a guest on MSNBC's The Beat with Ari Melber on June 1, 2018, along with Yo! MTV Raps co-host Dr. Dré. During their segment they promoted the re-boot of the show.


=== New York and Philadelphia radio ===
Ed and Dré—who hosted the high-rated Morning Show with Ed, Lisa, and Dré on New York's Hot 97 FM from 1993 to 1998—released only one album, 1994's poorly received Back Up Off Me! The previous year, they starred as a pair of hapless barbers turned police officers in the New Line Cinema feature film Who's the Man?, which was well received and was hailed as the hip hop whodunit.
He was later a radio personality on New York's Hip-Hop Radio Power 105.1 FM starting in January 2003 until January 2010 and was reprimanded by Oprah Winfrey for his use of the word "bitches," leading to an Oprah show on the subject of disrespect in hip hop. He also appeared on the VH1 program 100 Greatest One-Hit Wonders in 2002. Lover also hosted a show on HBO in 2000–2001 titled KO Nation. Ed is currently the host of the hit TV show Hip Hop Hold 'Em along with the self-produced web show called C'mon, Son! edited and post production by BrowCo. He was also the co-host of the morning show on WWPR-FM (Power 105.1) in New York City until he was released from the station on Friday, November 19, 2010. In 2011, Lover became the host of his own show called "Friday Night Flava" on WRKS (Kiss FM) in New York City.
On June 21, 2014, Ed Lover became part of the Old School 100.3 FM family in Philadelphia with his own "The Ed Lover Show". He later joined 107.9 in Philadelphia on a show with Monie Love.


== Filmography ==


=== Film ===


=== Television ===


== Discography ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Ed Lover at IMDb
Ed Lover TV
Ed Lover Cmon Son
JetJan Lucanus is an American comic book writer, filmmaker, martial artist, musical artist, and entrepreneur. He is the founder and CEO of the transmedia company Creative Impulse Entertainment, Inc., co-creator/co-writer of the mixed martial arts comic books series JFH: Justice For Hire, is a filmmaker, an international martial arts champion in both the full contact sport of San Shou and the sport of Tai Chi Push Hands, and is a rapper/singer/songwriter. Lucanus also consults on business, production, and creative strategies for companies and individuals across comics, film, television, music, and games.  He is a graduate of the New York University Maurice Kanbar Institute for Film & Television, Tisch School of the Arts, holding a degree in Film Production.
As a transmedia artist, Lucanus has been called a "martial arts comic book prodigy" and an "entertainment renaissance man" for his work combining comic books, film, animation, and music, most notably for the JFH: Justice For Hire entertainment property. Comic book legend Neal Adams was quoted on interview with iFanboy stating, "Understand we've got new people doing new things – Jan is an example of that... There's a new interrelationship between the forms that's beginning to develop from comic books to motion comics to film and television. Those of us who are aware of it are going to be involved in making entertainment from beginning to end".


== Comic Books and Motion Comic Animation ==
Lucanus' childhood saw his father, Jan C. Childress, writing as a contributing journalist for several "Zines" (fan-created magazines) including the Marvel Zombie Society comic, publications such as The Overstreet Comic Book Monthly (an offshoot of Overstreet Comic Book Price Guide) and Comic Critics Calvacade, and writing The Good Guys (comics) monthly series for Jim Shooter's Defiant Comics. Lucanus' father wrote the original script for the comic series, JFH: Justice For Hire, based on Lucanus' series of shorts in film school. The original "JFH" comic script was adapted into a feature film screenplay by Lucanus and his writing partners Mercer Boffey and Banyan Williamson-Masuda, then re-adapted back into a comic script for cinematic clarity. This marked the beginning of a project development model for  Lucanus' company, Creative Impulse Entertainment (CIE) a method of sourcing and developing comic book content prime for film and television, inspiring the young filmmaker to call upon his father and several creative partners to create comic books ideas to be moved into production via a new CIE subsidiary, Creative Impulse Publishing, which officially launched in 2007.
As the company's flagship title, JFH received wide support from both the martial arts and comic book communities, including a comic book giveaway contest with Inside Kung Fu Magazine, Black Belt, and comic book website Newsarama.  JFH: Justice-For-Hire was followed up with several other Creative Impulse Publishing properties on the comic book market with a focus on digital releases.
Creative Impulse Entertainment branched out into motion comic animation, starting with Junior Energy (2008), a children's intellectual property created, written, and produced by Jan Lucanus and Mercer Boffey for the Clinton Global Initiative and JuniorEnergy.org. Bringing a filmmaker's eye to comics, Lucanus officially began taking credit as a comic book director on actress Paula Garcés' Aluna comic books (2010), where Lucanus paneled (wrote a shot list for) writer David Cornue's original script and photo referenced every shot in the story with live actors and props from which comic artist Antonio Rojo used to create original drawings (a process he adopted for his work on capturing martial arts choreography for the JFH comics). Lucanus then directed the motion comic adaptation of Aluna, working directly with several notable actors including Paula Garces, Ahmed Best, and Malik Yoba. With Lucanus and the Creative Impulse team having designed all of the original characters in the Aluna comic book, Aluna herself became a playable character in the online battle arena game Heroes of Newerth (HoN) and has been downloaded and played millions of times.Creative Impulse Entertainment partnered with Willow Road Animation to adapt the JFH comic book series into a motion comic animation. The pilot episode, directed by Jan Lucanus, was launched in February 2012 during the "JFH FreeFor All" Event with leading digital comic network, Graphicly, media outlet iFanboy, and animation software developer Reallusion. The event called upon artists from across the globe to submit drawings and animations of their favorite JFH characters as well free comics and animation software as incentives to participate. Winners were announced in April 2012. The JFH Motion Comic Animation had its premiere public screening at the 2012 San Diego Comic Con International's Superhero Kung Fu Extravaganza hosted by Ric Meyers, where Jan Lucanus and Willow Road President Zach Shelton announced a live action feature film and animated series production partnership for JFH: Justice-For-Hire with Spillwall Productions. Spillwall Vice President Sam Levine was present to address the event's audience.
In addition to his activities as a transmedia artist, Lucanus acts as a development executive and consultant on several comic book properties, and has a slate of intellectual properties in development and in production via a partnership between Creative Impulse Entertainment and Nine Dot Entertainment.


== Filmmaking ==
In high school, he attended the New York Film Academy for two summers, and later attended and graduated from New York University's Maurice Kanbar Institute of Film & Television, Tisch School of the Arts, where he majored in Directing for Film & Television. Among his classmates were his creative partner, actor Mercer Boffey, and business partners Andrew Vannata and Patrick Brennan, cinematographers Jon Chen and Jody Lee Lipes, directors Jess Manafort and Lance Edmands, rapper/writer/director/actor Aldous Davidson, DJ Madame Turk, model/singer/actress Sinsu Co, Danity Kane singer D. Woods, and comedian Aziz Ansari.
While at NYU, he wrote, directed and edited Hotel Harbor View, a short film based on the   Japanese Manga graphic novel Hotel Harbour View by Natsuo Sekikawa and Jiroh Taniguchi. The film  was an official selection at  New York University's FirstRun Film Festival, and the New York International Independent Film and Video Festival, and won several awards including Best Short Film at the Black Earth Film Festival. Hotel Harbor View was his first film to be produced and released under the then-newly incorporated Creative Impulse Entertainment banner,  and was instrumental in securing the financing for his next film, the martial arts themed Justice-For-Hire, which was also his senior thesis film at NYU. JFH was one of two subjects of the textbook Making Movies from Pearson Publishing, an educational publication on independent filmmaking, shared with filmmaker Spike Lee.
Lucanus interned for fellow NYU alum, music video director Marc Klasfeld, at Rockhard Films, and quickly rose to the title of Production Coordinator, with his own projects. He has directed several music videos, viral commercial video campaigns, short films, web series, and motion comic animations,. His experience in martial arts aided in his direction of live action and animated fight choreography, for which he has won several honors, including induction into Budo Magazine's Hall of Fame for Outstanding Achievement in Martial Arts Cinema (2005) and recognition from Martial Arts Magazine's Hall of Honors for Outstanding Contribution to the Martial Arts (2007) and Goodwill Ambassador to the Martial Arts (2008). He  has also directed martial arts and comedy shorts for former fighter, comedian Gabe Dorado (2009), directed talent such as Paula Garces, Ahmed Best, and Malik Yoba for the motion comic animation Aluna (2010) directed and starred in music videos with rapper Aldous Davidson, and shot music manager Paul Shull's "Mr. Butterscotch" action videos featuring fencing fight choreography (2012) based on the upcoming comic book of the same name in co-production with the Canadian-based Foundation Features.As announced at the 2012 San Diego Comic Con International Superhero Kung Fu Extravaganza, his feature directorial debut will be the live-action adaptation of his comic book series, JFH: Justice-For-Hire, slated for production via a partnership between his company Creative Impulse Entertainment. (CIE) and the Canadian-based Spillwall Productions. He will also co-star as one of the main characters, "Ebony", reprising his role from the JFH web series and short films. The feature follows an original story of his and developed via a partnership between CIE and Nine Dot Entertainment that will act as a prequel to the first season of JFH comics. He wrote the jointly with screenwriter and director Aurore Barry, and his father, comic book writer Jan C. Childress.In 2013, the JFH creative team launched a successful Kickstarter campaign to shoot a short film to establish the cinematic tone for the JFH feature, as well as test out a martial arts camera system designed for the film, called "Weapon Camera Movement".  The short, entitled JFH: Retribution Task Force, is currently in production, and is bringing together several characters across the JFH Universe for a common goal – stopping acts of violence against women committed by the Raskol gangs of Papua New Guinea.


=== Creative Impulse Entertainment (CIE) ===
Lucanus incorporated Creative Impulse Entertainment (CIE), in March 2003.He had been producing writings, drawings, and films under the banner of CIE since high school, and upon official incorporation, continued to grow the brand with short films and music videos. Jan later launched the subsidiaries, Creative Impulse Films, Creative Impulse Music, Creative Impulse Publishing, and the freelance company, Creative Impulse Alliance, to compartmentalize productions across media.  CIE operates as an umbrella corporation for creative design, intellectual property development, and production across comic books, filmmaking, music, and games.  Among His strategic advisors are transmedia artist Michael Counts, producer Barry Navidi, and former Village Roadshow Pictures President & COO Steve Krone.


== Music ==
Jan Lucanus began singing with his parents who would perform Hindu bhajans (songs praising the Hindu pantheon of Gods & Goddesses) on a weekly basis even before his birth. In high school, Lucanus' peers introduced him to rap music, and a few friends were rappers themselves. After several failed attempts to help his friends get record deals, Lucanus had started writing rap lyrics himself. In college, Jan was on the outskirts of the United Nationz rap crew led by Tox Simian (not to be confused with rapper Cam'ron's U.N. group), with his first official featured appearance singing the chorus on the UN track "We So Gangsta". Jan left the crew due to professional differences and focused on filmmaking.
In his senior year of college at NYU, Lucanus took a hip hop class to assist with his performance abilities in prep for his upcoming role in his Justice-For-Hire featurette. He returned to rap with his creative partner and JFH co-star Mercer Boffey, a proficient beatboxer, and performed several times as part of his duties in the class. In addition to rapping together on the "JFH" soundtrack song "Killa Icons" produced by Sage Michael, Lucanus and Mercer later formed a group with several athletes called Strip Hop, a burlesque-style act that included dancing and rapping that Mercer and Jan held in various homes for all female audiences. The act was picked up by burlesque showrunner Norman Gosney as part of a set that eventually became the Blushing Diamond Review in New York. Lucanus and Mercer left the act behind and formed the duo Sneakers & Jeans, as well as pursuing personal projects.
Lucanus developed several comic book properties for Universal Music Group's roster of artists, leading to creative consultation for the musical artist Kerli on the music video for her Zero Gravity (song) release and expanded projects, as well as an upcoming animated co-production with another artist yet to be announced. Lucanus also teamed up with rapper/actor Aldous Davidson to form the rap duo Ultra Vanity Testosterone (UVT) – their independent release The Freestyled Mixtape debuted in February 2013. Jan's solo comic book crossover album project is called Heroes Culture, with production by Sage Michael Music. The first single, a hip hop and rock infused track entitled  "M.B.T. (Motivated by Truth)", produced by Sage Michael and Davide Berardi, was released on YouTube and Soundcloud in 2010, and was first performed live that year at a benefit for the More Than Me Foundation hosted by Prince Lorenzo Borghese. Art for a second single entitled, "Aura Ignite" has been posted on the Jan Lucanus Myspace page, but a release date has not been announced.  The release date for the full Heroes Culture project has also not been announced, although the official Jan Lucanus website has the project mentioned as "in production" in the biography section. Subsequent songs have been released without the "Heroes Culture" branding on the associated art.In 2012, Lucanus and music manager Paul Shull struck a partnership between their respective brands to feature emerging musical talent from all genres: Creative Impulse Music & Mr. Butterscotch Present The Artist of The Month. Lucanus is also a regularly featured artist in the Freestyle Monday's collective – one of New York's longest running hip hop freestyle events hosted by rapper iLLsPoKiNN and singer Mariella.


== Martial arts ==
Lucanus' mother coerced his father into taking Taiji Quan, Karate, and Shaolin Kung Fu as a way for the couple to share quality time before Lucanus was born. The son was raised around his parents' martial arts masters and fellow students in Chinatown, Manhattan in New York. Lucanus has taught martial arts professionally since the age of 16.
In addition to studying under his first teacher, his father, Jan C. Childress, in the martial arts styles of Yang Tai Chi Chuan, Praying Mantis Kung Fu, and various sets of Neigong (nei kung, internal power building exercises), Lucanus has studied numerous fighting systems. Lucanus' primary Tai Chi teacher was his father's teacher, Sifu Keith Tong – a doctor of Chinese Herbal Medicine whose father, Tong Kwan Tak, was a direct disciple of Wu Kung-i, a master of the Wu Family Style of Tai Chi Chuan – as well as Sifu Chang Ki Chan who passed down the esoteric style of Liuhebafa to Jan's father. Jan trained under Shaolin monk Shi Yan Ming at the U. S. A. Shaolin Temple, but was asked to leave the school after fighting in his first tournament – the International Kung Fu Strike Challenge – to win first place and earn a spot on renowned Beijing coach Li Ti Liang's New York International San Shou Team. San Shou (or Sanshou) is a full contact fighting sport that combined American boxing, Chinese kickboxing, and Mongolian wrestling (it now incorporates knee and elbow strikes and is known as San Da). Lucanus, at 18 years old, fought on the 2000–2001 team captained by veteran martial arts practitioner, Novell G. Bell, and faced off against Beijing's professional San Shou team in two separate events held at New York's Maritime Hotel. Considered an underdog with his teammates against the Beijing pros that were also formerly coached by Li Ti Liang, Lucanus won a Silver Cup in the fights for the 165 lb. weight class under his San Shou fighting nickname, "The Gentleman" . Lucanus dropped off the team to focus on film school (which he was attending while on the team) and began training in Tae Kwon Do and Dragon Style Kung Fu with his long-time friend, Ian Morgan, choreographer of many of Lucanus' action film sequences, and a champion Muay Thai fighter.As was standard fair in the Chinatown martial arts community, challenges from other martial artists looking to test their skill level came regularly to Lucanus' weekly 3-hour Tai Chi class with Sifu Keith Tong in Chinatown's Forsythe Park, and Lucanus and his father regularly sought challenges. One day, while Lucanus was on set wrapping production for his NYU senior thesis film, "Justice-For-Hire", his class was challenged by former childhood chess champion Joshua Waitzkin, who had become a top student of the renowned Grandmaster William C. C. Chen and was in training for the Tai Chi Chung Hwa World Cup. The father/son duo decided to re-enter the U. S. martial arts tournament circuit together as a team in the sport of Tai Chi Push Hands to compete against Josh (pushing hands – also known as "t'ui shou" – as played in the Tai Chi World Cup, is a competition combining elements of throwing and grappling arts such as Sumo & Greco-Roman Wrestling, Judo, Aikido, and Shuai Jiao with the principles of Tai Chi). The father/son duo won several medals at the 2004 International Chinese Martial Arts Competition in Orlando, Florida in 2004, but the gold medals were swept Josh and his teammate Daniel Caulfield. After the tournament, the father/son duo was invited to join the first William C. C. Chen (WCCC) U.S. Push Hands Team coached by Josh. The team, consisting of Josh Waitzkin, Daniel Caulfield, Jan C. Childress, Jan Lucanus, Trevor Cohen, Irving Yee, Calum Douglas-Reid, Maximillion Chen, and Parichard Holm, took several trophies at the 2004 Tai Chi World Cup in Taipei, Taiwan. Jan's father took the Bronze World Cup for his weight class. Josh Waitzkin took the title of World Champion, and documented the experience in his book, The Art of Learning: An Inner Journey to Optimal Performance.After the 2005 season, the original WCCC International Push Hands Team disbanded. Several students shifted focus to Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu (BJJ), and Josh introduced Lucanus to Professor John Machado (who would later become a creative partner and mentor for Jan and an advisor for his company). Subsequently, Lucanus trained in the De La Riva system of BJJ under Professor Jamie Alexandrino, Shuai Jiao, freestyle wrestling, and Chan Tai San's Tapered Staff form under Sifu David Ross at the New York San Da MMA gym, and in Olympic Judo, Greco-Roman Wrestling, and Jujutsu under Sensei Shiro Oishi of Oishi Judo Club  – one of New York City's oldest judo clubs located in TriBeCa. Lucanus also studied Boxing, Muay Thai, and San Da with Ian Morgan, Ian's protege Brandon Jones, and their Seiha Army fight team, as well as mixed martial arts with William C. C. Chen's son, Maximillion C. J. Chen.In 2008, Lucanus founded the Martial Arts Creative Team (MACT) to design unique action choreography for comic books, films, and beyond, as well as a unique style of camerawork to capture the choreography called "Weapon Camera Movement". Members include Ian Morgan, John Machado, Maximillion Chen, Mercer Boffey, Aurore Barry, Hinton Wells, Gabe Dorado, Glenyss Puentavella, and Jordan Forth.In 2009, the William C. C. Chen's (WCCC) U. S. Tai Chi Push Hands Team was reignited, and Lucanus returned as the official captain of the team for the 2009–2011 seasons, running training and tournament preparation, as well as competing alongside his father and Calum Douglas-Reid, and new team members Jordan Forth, Eric William Johnson, Kan Kanzaki, and J. J. Blickstein. Lucanus, his father, and the team won several gold medals on the International Chinese Martial Arts Circuit (ICMAC), with the father/son duo taking gold medals in the ICMAC's first tournament to use Extreme Push Hands rules (full body grappling with Tai Chi space control tactics within a ring) organized by Dr. Shie-Ming Hwang and Nick Scrima. Several members of the WCCC Team ranked number one in numerous weight classes for the 2010 season. Jan used the ICMAC tournaments just as his coach Josh Waitzkin did before him: as preparation for the Tai Chi World Cup in Taiwan. Jan competed and won the silver World Cup medal on October 4, 2010 in Taiwan for Push Hands in the 165 lbs. weight class, while his father once again won the bronze World Cup medal in the 185 lbs. weight class. However, also as his former coach Josh before him, despite the accumulation of several international titles and medals, Jan's style of competitive push hands has received criticisms within the tai chi community for being "all wrong".In 2012, Lucanus began training in Bruce Lee's philosophy of Jeet Kune Do with Sifu Sam Levine at the Combative Arts Academy while continuing his training in Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu with John Machado and Tai Chi Chuan with his private students.


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website
Jan Lucanus at IMDb
Jan Lucanus at Comic Book DatabaseGary Maurice "Joyner" Lucas Jr. (born August 17, 1988) is an American rapper, singer, songwriter, actor & entrepreneur. Lucas first received widespread exposure and critical acclaim after the release of his single "Ross Capicchioni" in 2015. In June 2017, he released his fourth mixtape, 508-507-2209, which was his first on a major label. In November 2017, Lucas released his single "I'm Not Racist", which quickly went viral, gaining him further mainstream attention. The video was nominated for the Grammy Award for Best Music Video at the 61st Grammy Awards. Since 2016, Lucas has also become known for remixing popular hip hop songs like "Gucci Gang" by Lil Pump, "Bank Account" by 21 Savage, "Panda" by Desiigner, "DNA" by Kendrick Lamar and many others. In October 2018, he announced his debut studio album ADHD, which was released in 2020.
Outside of music, Lucas co-founded the music technology platform Tully in 2015, with manager Dhruv Joshi.


== Early life ==
Gary Maurice Lucas Jr. was born on August 17, 1988, in Worcester, Massachusetts. He began rapping at the age of 10 and attended South High Community School in Worcester.


== Career ==


=== 2007–2017: Early beginnings, record deal, and 508-507-2209 ===
Joyner Lucas first started rapping under the name G-Storm, but by 2007 had changed his stage name to Future Joyner and started working with his cousin Cyrus tha Great, forming a group called Film Skool Rejekts. That year they released Workprint: The Greatest Mixtape of All Time. Lucas released his first solo mixtape, titled Listen to Me, in 2011. After rapper Future came to prominence, Lucas dropped the "Future" from his name and continued as Joyner Lucas. He released his first mixtape under this new moniker in 2013, titled LFO's (Low Frequency Oscillators). His next mixtape, Along Came Joyner, was released on April 5, 2015. This mixtape contained his critically acclaimed "Ross Capicchioni". Following the success of the song, Lucas was featured in the 2015 BET Hip-Hop Awards Cypher. Originally intended to appear in the online-only cypher, he was later promoted to rap as part of the live broadcast cyphers based on the strength of his initial performance.Lucas signed to Atlantic Records on September 21, 2016. Lucas went on to release a project titled 508-507-2209 on June 16, 2017, with Atlantic Records. The mixtape charted at #7 on the Heatseekers Albums chart on Billboard and contained the singles "I'm Sorry", "Ultrasound", "Just Like You" and "Winter Blues". Ever since 2016, Lucas has also become known for remixing popular hip hop songs.On November 28, 2017, Lucas released the single "I'm Not Racist" via his YouTube channel. The music video quickly went viral and gained critical acclaim. The controversial song is about race and society, and race relations from the perspectives of a white man and a black man. The video was nominated for the Grammy Award for Best Music Video at the 61st Grammy Awards, but lost to Childish Gambino's "This Is America". Lucas and Chris Brown announced a collaborative project titled Angels & Demons on February 25, 2018, with the project's first single "Stranger Things" releasing the following day. On April 1, 2018, Lucas released the single "Frozen", a song focused on different forms of reckless driving. The second single from the Angels and Demons collaborative mixtape, "I Don't Die", was released on May 2.
On December 24, 2018, it was announced that Lucas departed from Atlantic Records.


=== 2018–2020: ADHD, and Evolution ===
On July 31, 2018, Lucas announced that he was forced to cancel appearances in the Australian and European legs of his I'm Kind of a Big Deal tour due to hoarseness and laryngitis. A month later, Lucas was featured on "Lucky You" from Eminem's tenth album, Kamikaze. The song debuted at number 6 on the Billboard Hot 100, marking Lucas' first top 10 entry on the chart. On October 12, 2018, Lucas announced that he would be releasing his debut studio album entitled ADHD. He also announced a single from the album that would be released the following Wednesday. The song, entitled "I Love", was released as the lead single from ADHD, which was released on March 27, 2020. It was preceded by nine singles from October 2018 to March 2020, the time before release. The album featured appearances from Logic, Young Thug, Chris Brown, Timbaland, Fabolous and King OSF as well as appearances from Chris Tucker and Kevin Hart who both appeared on skits.
On August 17, 2020, Lucas announced the release date of his debut EP, Evolution. It was released on October 23, 2020. It was preceded by two singles, "Fall Slowly" featuring Ashanti and "Snitch". The EP featured appearances from The Game, iyla, Ashanti, Rick Ross and Elijah James.


=== 2021–present: "Ramen & OJ", "Your Heart", movie shoot, and Not Now, I'm Busy ===
On April 30, 2021, Lucas released the single "Ramen & OJ" with Lil Baby. It was accompanied by a music video. Lucas contributed a song titled "Shoot My Shot" to the Space Jam: A New Legacy soundtrack.
Throughout 2021, Lucas released a number of singles, most notably "Your Heart" with J. Cole, which was released on September 24, 2021, and accompanied by a music video. Lucas also collaborated with other notable rappers, including Lil Durk on the song "Rambo", released on December 3, 2021, Lil Tjay on the song "Dreams Unfold", released on August 25, 2021, and Ty Dolla $ign on the song "Late to the Party", released on October 8, 2021, and accompanied by a music video. Solo singles "Duck Duck Goose", released on October 29, 2021, and "My Escape", released on December 17, 2021, were also accompanied by music videos.
On April 1, 2022, Lucas released a tribute song to Kanye West entitled "Ye Not Crazy", similar to his earlier tribute song to Will Smith entitled "Will". However, due to the backlash of West making antisemitic remarks, Lucas removed it from streaming services months later.
On June 4, 2022, Lucas uploaded a photo to social media of him in the studio with the caption 'Working on new album....'. That was interrupted however by the announcement on October 29, 2022, that Lucas would be shooting a movie with good friend and fellow Boston native Mark Wahlberg.
On March 8, 2023, Lucas uploaded to social media, announcing that the cover art for his upcoming studio album would be released soon with a single released on March 10, 2023, called "Devil's Work 2", the sequel to the original song from his debut album ADHD. On March 9 the artwork was released, revealing the albums title to be "Not Now, I'm Busy".
One month later on April 3, 2023, Lucas announced another single called "Blackout" featuring Future which was released on April 7, 2023. Both singles were accompanied by music videos. In a video posted to social media, and also with Apple Music pre-releasing the album on a single-by-single basis, it was revealed that the album will be released on August 18, 2023.


== Artistry ==
Lucas has cited several artists as influences in his music, but he cites Eminem as his biggest musical influence. He also revealed he was influenced by Will Smith in his song "Will", which he would release a remix of featuring Will Smith himself on May 15, 2020. He cites Jay-Z as one of his influences too.


== Personal life ==
Joyner Lucas shares a son named Joyner Messiah Lucas (born February 20, 2016) with Carmen Julissa Ayala, with whom he had an off and on romantic relationship. Lucas tells the story of his son's conception in his song "Forever" on his mixtape 508-507-2209. Joyner Messiah Lucas is loved and adored by his father and referenced in many of his songs. He has also made cameos in his father's music videos. Most recently he played Will Smith's son Jaden Smith in the video of "Will".Lucas has revealed that the title of his album ADHD comes from the fact that he was diagnosed with ADHD as a child. He explained that people surrounding him, including his own parents, made him feel like he was not normal and treated him differently as a result. Eventually, he would act out, bullying other classmates, failing classes, and get sent to an alternative school after expulsion.


== Feuds ==


=== Logic ===
According to Lucas, when he was on Tech N9ne's tour bus, he heard some records from Tech's album The Storm. Lucas expressed interest on collaborating with Logic on the song "Sriracha" and felt that he could add to the display of fast-flow rapping, and Tech acquiesced. Logic was originally slated to be the only feature on "Sriracha", but when he spent over six months to deliver his verse, Lucas hopped on the track to offer his own. Joyner stated that when they got the record back, he could tell that Logic was not "too happy" about him being on the track once he heard it. On his remix of Future's "Mask Off", Joyner, unhappy by the work Logic turned in after taking nearly half a year to edit his verse, directly addressed the disappointing display. Both he and Tech N9ne were upset with Logic for not emulating the style of quick flow on the song.After Logic's hit song "1-800-273-8255" peaked at number three on the Billboard Hot 100, Joyner Lucas immediately took offense and argued that the track was named in order to bring direct competition to his song, "I'm Sorry" from his album 508-507-2209. In a later interview, he called Logic "corny" and in another incident, he said that he thinks that Logic "can rap" but feels like "he tries to prove that he's black too much for me." With both Logic's single and Lucas' mixtape dealing with the issue of mental health representation and resource allocation, Lucas was careful to not slam the track too hard.When Logic dropped his song "Yuck" from his mixtape Bobby Tarantino II in March 2018, the veiled diss inside the song was quickly spotted by Lucas and his fans, despite Logic saying that there was no diss in the song. Seemingly nonplussed by the insult, Lucas dared Logic to call him out directly on Twitter. That same month, Joyner took aim at Logic's song "44 More" and his album Everybody on his remix of BlocBoy JB's "Look Alive".In 2019, the two rappers ended their feud, which was revealed when Logic made a guest appearance on Joyner Lucas' song "ISIS", the third single from ADHD. Lucas kept the name of the collaborator a secret until he released the song.


=== Hopsin ===
In September 2018, when a fan asked rapper Hopsin on Twitter who would win in a rap battle between him and Joyner Lucas, Hopsin replied, "That's a dumb question that I'm sure you already know the answer to." Not long after, Lucas commented, "Hold up. @Hopsin wtf is that supposed to mean???" In his response, Hopsin stated that he would "b[r]eak his soul" and also dissed Logic in the comment. This dispute would prove to be short-lived, when in less than two days Hopsin shared a screenshot of a FaceTime call with Lucas, indicating that they finally made peace, but still wanted people to consider who would beat the other in a rap battle.


=== Tory Lanez ===
On November 19, 2018, Lanez claimed that he was a better rapper than Joyner Lucas on an Instagram Live session. Incredulous, Lucas immediately responded by inviting Lanez to a battle rapping challenge and telling him to let the public decide who is better. The next day, Lanez dropped a freestyle over Eminem's "Lucky You", of which Lucas made a guest appearance on. In less than 24 hours, Joyner responded with his freestyle over "Litty" by Meek Mill featuring Tory Lanez, also targeting rapper Trippie Redd, who joined Tory's Instagram Live and slandered Joyner's name as well. Shortly after, Lanez retaliated with his own freestyle of "Litty", titled "Litty Again", taking shots at Joyner's collaboration with Eminem. Lucas' answer song was a freestyle of Kodak Black's "Zeze". On the track, he mentions Tory's being accused of plagiarism in 2016, when listeners noticed that the ending of Lanez's song "4am Flex" was similar to Kendrick Lamar's "The Art of Peer Pressure". Joyner also accuses him of copying rapper Don Q's flow on his 2017 Funkmaster Flex freestyle. On November 23, Tory posted on Instagram a video of him declaring victory in the feud and celebrating. Displeased, Lucas reposted the video with his own comment, with a reference to Lanez as a singer.The end of this rivalry was made public on August 8, 2019, when Joyner Lucas and Tory Lanez collaborated on their remix of "Suge" by DaBaby.


== Awards and nominations ==


=== Grammy Awards ===
The Grammy Awards are held annually by the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences. Joyner has two Grammy nominations altogether.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===
ADHD (2020)
Not Now, I'm Busy (2023)


== References ==


== External links ==
 Media related to Joyner Lucas at Wikimedia Commons
Joyner Lucas at AllMusicLana Michele Moorer (born October 11, 1970), better known by her stage name MC Lyte, is an American rapper, disc jockey, and entrepreneur. Considered one of the pioneers of female rap, MC Lyte first gained fame in the late 1980s, becoming the first female rapper to release a full solo album with 1988's critically acclaimed Lyte as a Rock. The album spawned the singles "10% Dis" and "Paper Thin". In 1989, she joined the supergroup Stop the Violence Movement, and appeared on the single "Self Destruction", which was the inaugural number-one single on the Billboard Hot Rap Singles chart.
Her second album Eyes on This (1989), included the single "Cha Cha Cha". In 1991, MC Lyte released the hit single "Poor Georgie", which marked her first appearance on the Billboard Hot 100. Her 1993 single "Ruffneck", made her the first solo woman rapper to achieve a gold certification from the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). In 1994, she collaborated with Janet Jackson on the song "You Want This", and was featured alongside Queen Latifah and Yo-Yo on the remix track "I Wanna Be Down" by Brandy. Her 1996 single "Keep On, Keepin' On" featuring Xscape, reached the top ten on Billboard Hot 100. She then collaborated with Missy Elliott on the hit song "Cold Rock a Party", which would become her fifth number-one song on the Hot Rap Singles chart. In 2004, she was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Female Rap Solo Performance for the track "Ride Wit Me".
Throughout her career, MC Lyte had collaborations with mainstream artists such as Sinéad O'Connor, Will Smith, Mary J. Blige, Jay-Z, Moby, Aerosmith, Beyoncé and will.i.am; and has been cited as an influence to many women in hip hop. Billboard & Vibe ranked her as one of the 50 greatest rappers (2023). She has received the "I Am Hip Hop" Icon Lifetime Achievement from the BET Hip Hop Awards, and was honored at the VH1 Hip Hop Honors. In October 2014, Lyte become the first female artist to perform Hip Hop at the White House. In September 2016 she was awarded with the W. E. B. Du Bois Medal, Harvard University's highest honor in the field of African and African-American studies. In addition to her career as a rapper, she has worked in parallel as voiceover talent for various events, writer, DJ and has starred in various roles in film and television. In 2022 has her directional debut with the short film Break Up In Love. Lyte has also worked with several charities, including her own foundation, Hip Hop Sisters.


== Early life ==
Lana Michele Moorer was raised in the East Flatbush section of Brooklyn, New York City. She began rapping at the age of 12. MC Lyte's original stage name was Sparkle. She began recording her first track at age 14, although it took two years before it was able to be released.: 1 She regards Milk Dee and DJ Giz, the hip hop duo Audio Two, as "totally like [her] brothers", because the three grew up together. Audio Two's father, Nat Robinson, started a label for them called First Priority. After making the label, Robinson cut a deal with Atlantic under a condition that Lyte would get a record contract with Atlantic as well.


== Musical career ==


=== Beginnings: Lyte as a Rock and Eyes on This (1987–1990) ===
In 1987, at the age of 16, Lyte released her debut single, "I Cram to Understand U (Sam)", being one of the first songs written about the crack era. She was 12 years old at the time she wrote the song.
In April 1988 she would release her debut album Lyte as a Rock. In addition to "I Cram to Understand U (Sam)" were released as singles "Paper Thin", the eponymous "Lyte as a Rock", and "10% Dis" (a diss track to then-Hurby Azor associate Antoinette). The album peaked #50 on the then Billboard Top Black Albums. Despite not having a great commercial performance, it is considered one of the best and most important rap albums, both in the 80s and in history. That year The Village Voice magazine would rate Lyte as "the best female vocalist in hip-hop". Lyte was also featured in the remix and music video of "I Want Your (Hands on Me)" by Irish singer Sinéad O'Connor, which debuted in May of that year on MTV.
In January 1989 Lyte joined Stop the Violence Movement with Boogie Down Productions, Public Enemy and Heavy D, among others. Together they released the single "Self Destruction" in response to violence in the hip hop and African American communities. The song debuted at #1 on the first week of Billboard Hot Rap Singles existence and the proceeds were donated to the National Urban League. In late August of that year, her song "I'm Not Havin' It" with Positive K would have an entry on the Billboard Hot Rap Singles (peaking at #16), becoming MC Lyte's first appearance on a chart as solo artist. In October 1989 Lyte would publish her second album Eyes on This. This album, like its predecessor, received a great critical reception and is recognized as a hip hop classic. With Eyes on This she became the first solo female rapper to have an entry on the Billboard 200. From this album came the singles "Cha Cha Cha" (with which for the first time as solo artist she charted on the Billboard Hot Black Singles and reached #1 on the Hot Rap Singles). "Stop, Look, Listen", and the socially conscious "Cappucino". During that year she also collaborated with Foster & McElroy, known for their work with En Vogue and Tony! Toni! Toné!, in the song "Dr. Soul". This single peaked #10 on Billboard Black Songs.In 1990 MC Lyte performed at Carnegie Hall.MC Lyte's DJ since the start of her career, DJ K-Rock, is a cousin, Kennith Moorer; aside from a break in 1992, the two have toured consistently to the present. During that time she also had her own dancers, Leg One and Leg Two, who performed with her both in shows and in music videos.


=== 1991–1995: Act Like You Know and Ain't No Other ===
On May 1, 1991, Lyte performed on "Yo! Unplugged Rap", the first MTV Unplugged to feature rap artists, alongside A Tribe Called Quest, De La Soul and LL Cool J. Her performance was praised by Entertainment Weekly's Ken Tucker, who commented, "MC Lyte performed her song 'Cappucino' like a rapping Aretha Franklin: Lyte brought out the soul in her lyrics." In September 1991, Lyte released her third album, Act Like You Know, which incorporates a softer R&B/New Jack Swing sound across some of the tracks. This release received more mixed reviews than her previous albums and commercially it performed more weakly than its predecessor,  Eyes on This. From this album came the singles "When in Love" and the socially conscious "Poor Georgie" (Lyte's first entry on the Billboard Hot 100 and her third #1 on the Hot Rap Singles) and "Eyes Are the Soul".
That year she also participated in the socially conscious single "Heal Yourself" by the collective "HEAL Human Education Against Lies", which also included Big Daddy Kane, Boogie Down Productions, Run-DMC, Queen Latifah and LL Cool J.
Between 1991 and 1992 Lyte participated in "The Greatest Rap Show Ever" concert held at Madison Square Garden with Public Enemy, Naughty by Nature, Queen Latifah, Geto Boys and DJ Jazzy Jeff & The Fresh Prince, among others. In the fall of 1991, she also performed in the hip-hop special Sisters In The Name of Rap alongside Salt-N-Pepa, Yo-Yo, Queen Latifah and Roxanne Shanté, among many others. it was recorded at the Ritz in NYC as a pay-per-view TV concert and released on VHS the following year.In October 1992, as part of the Mo Money soundtrack, MC Lyte collaborated with Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis, known primarily for their work with Janet Jackson, on the single "Ice Cream Dream". In 1992 she also performed on Kris Kross's Back to School Jam tour, which also featured A Tribe Called Quest and Fu-Schnickens.Also during that year Lyte began work on her next album, titled Ain't No Other, which was released on June 22, 1993. With this album, in which she adopts a more hardcore hip hop sound, Lyte achieved better critical reception than her predecessor. "Ruffneck" was released as a single, which would become her first top 40 single on the Billboard Hot 100, peaking at #35, and fourth #1 on the Hot Rap Singles, also earning her first gold certification. With "Ruffneck" MC Lyte would also get a nomination for the 36th edition of the Grammy Awards in the Best Rap Solo Performance category. In October of that year, Lyte performed at the 1993 Budweiser Superfest with SWV, Bell Biv Devoe, LeVert, Big Daddy Kane and Silk.In May 1994 MC Lyte participated on the performance on the finale of The Arsenio Hall Show, alongside the likes of KRS-One, Wu-Tang Clan, Naughty by Nature, Guru of Gang Starr, Yo-Yo, Das EFX and A Tribe Called Quest, among others. In June collaborates with Ice Cube, Public Enemy's Chuck D and Ice-T on Public Enemy's Terminator X album Super Bad. In the middle of 1994 she collaborated with Janet Jackson on the single remix and music video for "You Want This", peaking at #8 on the Billboard Hot 100 and earning a nomination for Music Video of the Year at the 2th edition of the Soul Train Lady of Soul Awards. Also during the summer of '94 participated in Janet Jackson's Janet World Tour.In early 1995, she collaborated with Queen Latifah and Yo-Yo on the remix of Brandy's top 10 single "I Wanna Be Down", earning a nomination at the 12th edition of the MTV Video Music Award in the Best Rap Video category. In April of that year collaborated alongside Meshell Ndegeocello, Patra, Yo-Yo, Latifah, Salt-N-Pepa and TLC's  Left Eye  Lopes in the rap remix of "Freedom" on the Panther movie soundtrack  In June she performed at the Jam for Peace with Warren G, Mary J. Blige, Brownstone, Adina Howard, Montell Jordan and Soul for Real. That year she also collaborated with Lin Que on the remix of Mary J. Blige's "You Bring Me Joy".


=== 1996–1998: Bad as I Wanna B and Seven & Seven ===
 In February 1996, MC Lyte collaborated on the R&B group Xscape's single "Can't Hang". In that month also collaborated with Lord Finesse on the interlude "Taking It Lyte" from his album The Awakening. In March, after signing with East West Records, she released "Keep On Keepin' On", the first single from her forthcoming album. This new collaboration with Xscape reached #10 on the Billboard Hot 100, her highest position on this chart as main artist, getting a gold certification. "Keep On Keepin' On" would also be part of the soundtrack of the film Sunset Park. In September win the Best R&B, Soul or Rap Video category in the 3th edition of Soul Train Lady of Soul Awards with this song. In August of that same year, Lyte released her fifth album, Bad as I Wanna B. With tracks with a Pop/R&B-oriented sound the album would receive mixed reviews. In November, is released as single a Sean "Puffy" Combs remix of "Cold Rock a Party" featuring Missy Elliott. This single peaked at #11 on the Billboard Hot 100 and would become her fifth #1 single on the Hot Rap Singles (fourth as lead artist), earning a gold certification. It also enters the top 40 of various charts outside the United States, being #1 and certified platinum in New Zealand.In February 1997 "Keep on Pushin" was included in the soundtrack of Dangerous Ground, in which MC Lyte, Bahamadia, Nonchalant and Yo-Yo collaborate under the production of Pete Rock. In March 1997, she collaborated with R&B singer Billy Lawrence on the single "Come On", which was included in the soundtrack of the movie Set it Off. Between June and July of that year she embarked on a USO Tour, performing for American troops in Italy and Greece. In November she collaborated with LL Cool J and Busta Rhymes on the debut album of the R&B supergroup LSG on the track "Curious", which was later released as single. That year Lyte also collaborated with Parliament-Funkadelic's Bootsy Collins on the single "I'm Leavin U (Gotta Go, Gotta Go)" from his album Fresh Outta 'P' University.

In August 1998 MC Lyte released her sixth studio album Seven & Seven. This would have a poor commercial and critical reception despite having the collaboration of famous producers and artists such as The Neptunes, LL Cool J, Missy Elliott, L.E.S. and Trackmasters, which would lead to Lyte's departure from EastWest Records. That year she also embarks again on a USO Tour, performing in Germany.


=== 1999–2012: Collaborations and releases independently ===
In November 1999 MC Lyte collaborated in the remix of Jammin of Bob Marley in the remix album Chant Down Babylon. This track would later be released as single. During that month she also collaborated with Will Smith and Tatyana Ali on "Who Am I" from Smith's album Willennium.
In March 2000 MC Lyte collaborated with Common and Bilal on the track "A Film Called (Pimp)" on Common's album Like Water for Chocolate.
In September 2001 her first compilation album The Very Best of MC Lyte was released.
In April 2002 the soundtrack for the TV series Dark Angel is released, which includes Lyte's songs "Dark Angel Theme" (in collaboration with Public Enemy) and "No Dealz" (with Ericka Yancey). In May of that year, MC Lyte collaborated with Angie Stone on the album version of "Jam for the Ladies" by electronica musician Moby. In November she collaborates with Erick Sermon and Rah Digga on the track "Tell Me" on Sermon's album React. During that time Lyte also became honorary member of Sermon and Redman's supergroup Def Squad.In March 2003, Lyte released the independently produced record Da Undaground Heat, Vol. 1, featuring Jamie Foxx. The album has little commercial impact and mixed reviews, but the single "Ride Wit Me" get a nomination for the 46th edition of the Grammy Awards in the Best Female Rap Vocal Performance category. In June of that year she teamed the rock group Aerosmith, Public Enemy's Chuck D and Flavor Flav, Busta Rhymes and Phife Dawg in the group the Spitballers. Together release "Let's Get Loud (Everybody Get Up)", which became the opening song of the 11th edition of the  ESPY Awards. In August Lyte collaborated with Beyoncé, Missy Elliott and Free on the single "Fighting Temptation" as part of the soundtrack for the homonymous film. That same month she released the compilation album The Shit I Never Dropped, which includes previously unreleased collaborations with En Vogue's Dawn Robinson, Da Brat, Missy Elliott, Erick Sermon and Clipse. In September collaborates with Black Eyed Peas's will.i.am and Fergie on the track "Mash Out" on will.i.am album Must B 21.
In May 2004, MC Lyte collaborated with Teena Marie and Medusa on the song "The Mackin' Game" from Teena Marie's album La Doña. In August he collaborated with Boyz II Men on their cover of "What You Won't Do for Love". That year Lyte was also nominated at the 4th edition of the BET Awards in the Best Female Hip Hop Artist category.
In 2005, she released two songs produced by Richard "Wolfie" Wolf called "Can I Get It Now" and "Don't Walk Away". MC Lyte's song "My Main Aim" was the title song of the basketball video game NBA Live 2005 by EA Sports. That year also collaborated with the Polish-born German producer DJ Tomekk on the track "Partyverlauf" from his album Numma Eyns.
In July 2006 MC Lyte releases "The Wonder Years" in collaboration with DJ Premier. In October of that year, Lyte was one of the artists honored at the 3th edition of the VH1 Hip Hop Honors, where she perform with Da Brat, Lil' Kim, Yo-Yo and Remy Ma. Lyte would be the first female solo rapper to achieve this recognition. During that time also performed on the "Ebony Black Family Reunion Tour" along with Doug E. Fresh, Slick Rick, and Whodini.
 In 2007 MC Lyte joined The Roots and Big Daddy Kane on the "VH1 Hip Hop Honors Tour". On July 9 performed at the opening of the 25th annual Martin Luther King Jr. Concert Series in Brooklyn. That month also performed for first time at the Essence Music Festival in New Orleans. In 2007 Lyte also released the singles "Mad At Me" and "Money" with KRS-One, the latter part of KRS-One's album Adventures in Emceein.
In May 2008, as member of the group Almost September with Philip "Whitey" White and Jared Lee Gosselin, MC Lyte released The Almost September EP. This features an R&B/Soul oriented sound. Later she embarks with the group on a tour in Europe. In June is released the song "Closer", a collaboration with her cousin Charles Hamilton. In October of that year performed "Cha Cha Cha" at the 3th edition of the BET Hip Hop Awards. In December MC Lyte collaborates with Jay-Z on "BK Anthem".In February 2009 Lyte collaborated with India Arie on the track "Psalms 23" from her album Testimony: Vol. 2, Love & Politics. In June of that year, Lyte collaborated again with Teena Marie on the track "The Pressure" from her latest album Congo Square. In that year also released the single with a Reggae-oriented sound "Brooklyn".In December 2010, she performed on the concert/TV Special VH1 Divas Salute The Troops, which also featured Nicki Minaj, Katy Perry, Keri Hilson, and Heart.
In 2011 MC Lyte performed again at the Essence Music Festival and released the single "Dada da Da".
In March 2012 collaborated with Grammy-winning singer Macy Gray on the interlude "Really (Skit)" from her album Covered. That year she also released the single "Dopestyle" and her own Mobile app MC Lyte App, where publishes her exclusive musical releases.


=== 2013–present: Legend and following projects ===
In January 2013 MC Lyte receives the Lifetime Achievement Award at Russell Simmons's Hip Hop Inaugural Ball. In June of that year releases "Cravin'" in collaboration with Stan Carrizosa as the first single from her forthcoming album. In October, Lyte was honored with the Icon Lifetime Achievement "I Am Hip Hop" at the 8th edition of the BET Hip Hop Awards for her contributions to hip-hop culture.In September 2014, "Dear John" (featuring Common & 10Beats) was released as the second single. That same month she reunited with Queen Latifah, Brandy and Yo-Yo to perform "I Wanna Be Down" at the 2014 BET Hip Hop Awards in celebration of its 20th anniversary. On October 14, 2014, MC Lyte performed "Cha Cha Cha" and "Dear John" to the President Barack Obama at the celebration of the 50th anniversary of the legislation that created the National Endowment for the Humanities and the National Endowment for the Arts, becoming the first female artist to perform Hip Hop at the White House. In November released "Ball" as the third single.In April 2015, MC Lyte released Legend, her eighth solo album and her first full-length studio album in 12 years. As part of Record Store Day, the album was available for 24 hours only on a limited-edition vinyl collector's item. Shortly before the album's release, the fourth and final single "Check" was released.In July 2016 Lyte performs at the Essence Music Festival in New Orleans. In September she is awarded the W. E. B. Du Bois Medal, the Harvard University's highest honor in the field of African and African-American studies. In October collaborated with Eric Benét on the track "Holdin' On" from his eponymous album.On June 11, 2017, during Hot 97's annual Summer Jam music festival, Remy Ma brought out MC Lyte, along with The Lady of Rage, Cardi B, Young M.A, Monie Love, Lil' Kim, and Queen Latifah, to celebrate female rappers and perform Latifah's 1993 hit single "U.N.I.T.Y." about female empowerment. Also released the single "Money on My Mind."
During 2018, she continued to release a strand of singles, one of which was 'Easy', in response to her British audience claiming that artists who recorded new jack swing were sexually explicit. In July of that year she was special guest on Queen Latifah's show "Ladies First" on Essence Music Festival along with Brandy, Missy Elliott, Salt-N-Pepa, Roxanne Shante, Yo-Yo, Monie Love and Remy Ma.In January 2019 received The Trail Blazer Award at the Trumpet Awards in Atlanta with Yo Yo, Lil Mama, Da Brat, Big Tigger, and DJ K-Rock helping to celebrate with a performance of Lyte songs.


== Other ventures ==


=== Acting ===
Her first acting role was in 1991, an off-Broadway theater play titled Club Twelve, a hip-hop twist on Twelfth Night alongside Wyclef Jean, Lauryn Hill, and Lisa Nicole Carson. After she made her film debut in the 1993 movie titled Fly by Night, starring alongside Jeffrey Sams, Ron Brice, and Steve Gomer, she also starred other films, such as A Luv Tale (1999), Train Ride (2000), Civil Brand (2002) and Playa's Ball (2003). In 2011, she guest starred in the Regular Show episode "Rap It Up", portraying a member of a hip-hop group also including characters voiced by Tyler, the Creator and Childish Gambino. Lyte signed with the production unit, Duc Tha Moon, for three years and eventually made a deal with Sirius Satellite Radio. Lyte also made appearances on the following television shows: Lyric Cafe, Hip Hop Honors, and Black in the 80s.In June 2006, MC Lyte was interviewed for the documentary The Rap Report, Part 2. MC Lyte talked about her career in rap music and what it was like during the beginnings of hip hop. She also performs a concert of her most famous hits. The program is produced by Rex Barnett.
In 2007, Lyte joined the cast of MTV's Celebrity Rap Superstar and coached Shar Jackson to a hip hop emcee victory in a mere eight weeks.
In 2017 Lyte played Detective Makena Daniels in the drama series Tales. Immediately following she played DEA Special Agent Katrina 'K.C.' Walsh in the Police drama S.W.A.T. and Tiffany in TV ONE production Loved to Death. Lyte has been featured on television as herself on such shows as In Living Color, Moesha, Cousin Skeeter, New York Undercover, My Wife and Kids, and Sisters in the Name of Rap. She also acted on such TV shows as In the House, Get Real, Half & Half, Queen of the South, and The District.
In 2020, Lyte starred in Bad Hair directed by Justin Simien, and Sylvie's Love, a period piece set in the 1960s opposite Tessa Thompson.In 2021 and 2022, Lyte starred as Tina Nixon in VH1's Hip Hop Family Christmas and its respective sequel, Hip Hop Family Christmas Wedding alongside Keri Hilson, Ne-Yo, Terrence J, Redman, and Serayah.


=== Business and commerce ===
MC Lyte opened Shaitel, a Los Angeles boutique that specialized in accessories from belts to sunglasses. "We sell a mixture of new and vintage [items]," she explained. "We also have a few signature pieces that are done just for the store. We boast to bring a little New York flavor out here to California."In 1997, MC Lyte launched Sunni Gyrl Inc., a global entertainment firm that specializes in artist management and development, production, and creative services and consulting.


=== Voiceover ===
In 1996, MC Lyte began doing voiceovers, working on a short-lived BET show called The Boot and doing some branding for the Starz network, Tide, AT&T, the National Urban League, and many others. She did the voice of Tia for the Mattel toy line Diva Starz from 2000 to 2002.


=== DJing ===
DJ MC Lyte served as the DJ of choice at Michael Jordan's 50th Birthday Celebration, at his 2013 wedding reception, and at Jay Leno's farewell party.  Lyte has gone on to provide music for The Image Awards, Nissan, Google, Black Enterprise, and many others.


=== Speaker ===
MC Lyte has spoken at colleges and universities, for organizations around the globe, and with notable people like Iyanla Vanzant, Russell Simmons, and Soledad O'Brien bringing a message of empowerment from her book Unstoppable: Igniting the Power Within to Achieve Your Greatest Potential. She also partnered with the Thurgood Marshall College Fund on the iLEAD international tour in South Africa to empower the continent's youth and up-and-coming leaders.


=== Leadership and philanthropy ===
In 1991, MC Lyte was featured in TV informercial promoting pro-choice abortion rights political action "The Most Exciting Women in Music" alongside Corina, Juliet Cuming, Kim Gordon (Sonic Youth), Lady Miss Kier (Deee-Lite), Kate Pierson (The B-52's), Crystal Waters, Tina Weymouth (Talking Heads, Tom Tom Club).In February 2006, her diary, as well as a turntable, records, and other assorted ephemera from the early days of hip hop, were donated to the Smithsonian Institution. This collection, entitled "Hip-Hop Won't Stop: The Beat, the Rhymes, the Life" is a program to assemble objects of historical relevance to the hip hop genre from its inception.
MC Lyte served as the President of the Los Angeles Chapter of the Recording Academy (the Grammy organization) from 2011 to 2013. She was the first African American woman to serve in this role.She is the founder of Hip Hop Sisters Foundation, which presented two $100,000 scholarships to college students each of the first two years of its inception and three $50,000 scholarships as a part of its #EducateOurMen initiative during its third year during the Soul Train Music Awards Red Carpet Preshow.


== Artistry ==


=== Influences, style and rapping technique ===
MC Lyte has considered artists such as Salt-N-Pepa, Rakim, Roxanne Shanté, Doug E. Fresh, Kool Moe Dee, Sha-Rock from Funky 4 + 1, and Run-DMC as her inspirations early in her musical career. In an interview with XXL in 2013, Lyte talks about the influence in her early days of Melle Mel and Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five (specifically the song "The Message"). She also claimed to know "all the words" on Kurtis Blow's records. Throughout her career, has also paid tribute to other artists such as Spoonie Gee (who she covered on Act Like You Know), Slick Rick, The Rock Steady Crew, LL Cool J and Queen Latifah. In an interview with The Source in 2015, when asked about her motivation to record her latest album, Legend, Lyte said she was inspired by Kendrick Lamar, Kanye West and Drake, among other rappers.Her style of rap has been described in the book Listen to Rap! Exploring a Musical Genre as "mid-tempo but aggressive (lots of plosives) and carefully articulated, with emphasis on end rhymes."


== Legacy ==
Greg Prato of AllMusic, referred to her as one of the first female rappers to "point out the sexism and misogyny that often runs rampant in hip-hop", often taking the subject "head on lyrically" in her songs. The Birmingham Times has credited her for helping transition hip-hop from the "feel-good, party vibe" of the late 1970s into a "socially conscious form of expression," as the rapper addressed issues like racism, sexism, and the drug culture had been affecting the African-American community. Billboard, The Washington Post, and NPR have cited her as a "hip-hop pioneer".MC Lyte has influenced the work of later female rappers such as Queen Latifah, Lil' Kim, Da Brat, Missy Elliott, Lauryn Hill, Monie Love, Eve, Rapsody, and Flo Milli, as well as rock artist Jack White. Also About.com ranked her No. 26 on their list of the 50 Greatest MCs of Our Time (1987–2007) and No. 6 in the Greatest Rappers Ever survey organized by NME. Furthermore, Vibe magazine has referred to MC Lyte as the "Queen of Rap".


== Personal life ==
In 2016, producer and rapper Q-Tip revealed on his Apple Music 1 show Abstract Radio that he used to date Lyte in his days before landing a record deal with A Tribe Called Quest. In the early 1990s, Lyte was in a relationship with Todd "Todd 1" Brown (1970-2019), then the producer of Yo! MTV Raps and at that time she would also make public in an interview that they were engaged. Brown later said that the latter was part of a joke started by one of the hosts of the show Tyrone "T Money" Kelsie "he came up with the marriage idea and then mayhem ensued. After the initial show, the story got so big that an interviewer actually asked Lyte about her "marriage"... and instead of her shooting down the rumor, she went along with it."  Later it was speculated in the media that for a few years she had a relationship with actress Tichina Arnold. Later these rumors were denied by Arnold. In May 2015 some media speculated that Lyte had dated R&B singer Janelle Monae, but these rumors have not been confirmed by either of them.In early 2016, she started dating Marine Corps veteran and entrepreneur John Wyche, after meeting him on Match.com. They announced their engagement in May 2017. "What can I say, except thank you Lord!!!... It's been a long time, this single life, and I thank you all for your prayers and kind words of hope," she wrote in an Instagram post dated January 21, 2017. "God has sent me true love. For all of you waiting on LOVE- don't give up – keep God first and he will see that you meet your match." In August they exchanged their vows during a musical wedding in Montego Bay, Jamaica. Reggae Congo bands played as Lyte walked down the aisle, and the couple's friend Kelly Price serenaded them during the ceremony. Afterward, an intimate gathering with only close friends and family members was held.
In August 2020 she filed for a divorce after three years of marriage.She is an honorary member of Sigma Gamma Rho sorority.


== Discography ==

Studio albumsLyte as a Rock (1988)
Eyes on This (1989)
Act Like You Know (1991)
Ain't No Other (1993)
Bad as I Wanna B (1996)
Seven & Seven (1998)
Da Undaground Heat, Vol. 1 (2003)
Legend (2015)Collaboration albumsAlmost September with Almost September (2008)


== Filmography ==


=== Film ===


=== Television ===


== Awards and nominations ==


=== Grammy Awards ===


=== Soul Train Lady of Soul Awards ===


=== MTV Video Music Award ===


=== Billboard Music Awards ===


=== BET Awards ===


=== Other accolades ===
2006 – VH1 Hip Hop Honors – Honoree
2013 – Hip Hop Inaugural Ball – Honored with the Lifetime Achievement
2013 – BET Hip Hop Awards –  Honored with the Icon Lifetime Achievement I Am Hip Hop Award for her contributions to hip-hop culture
2016 – Harvard University – Hutchins Center for African and African American Research's W. E. B. Du Bois Medal
2019 – Trumpet Awards – Trail Blazer Award


== References ==


== External links ==

https://m.imdb.com/name/nm0529310
Official website
MC Lyte Interview, 2009
MC Lyte Documentary
Let's Talk About The Female MCs Who Shaped Hip-Hop
MC Lyte Billboard
MC Lyte on Spotify
MC Lyte: The Blueprint For Today's Female MC
Smithsonian Anthology of Hip-Hop & Rap Music (2021). Curation of the Anthology was headed by a committee including MC Lyte. Smithsonian National Museum of African American History and Culture and Smithsonian Folkways.Michael Januario (born January 13, 1983) better known by his stage name M-Dot is an Italian-American rapper and producer. Before becoming a rap musician, Januario played college basketball at BHCC, MCLA and Fitchburg State.


== Career ==
Born in Revere, Massachusetts, M-Dot initially gained expanded exposure when touring Switzerland as the opener  for Lawrence rapper Krumb Snatcha (Gang Starr Foundation) in the mid 2000s. 
Frequent collaborations with respected rap groups, and consistently touring overseas, have built M-Dot's audience. M-Dot is known for a high level of productivity and his multi-syllable rhyme schemes, having attained a bachelor's degree in English.  On December 19, 2014 he dropped the single "Shine" featuring Dominique Larue, Katy Gunn and Wu Tang MC Method Man, it later appeared on his highly touted debut album "egO anD The eneMy" (released on 1/27/17). On December 30, 2017 renowned Hip-Hop outlet UGHH announced ‘egO anD The eneMy’ as the top selling release for the entire calendar year (of 2017). The album which received vast critical acclaim, boasts a noteworthy production lineup with Marley Marl, Large Professor, Hi Tek, Marco Polo (producer), Buckwild, DJ 7L among others. On December 22, 2015 M-Dot & his visual team released a music video titled "123 Flow", the minute and a half long clip is one of the first fully interactive 360° music videos showcasing a 6-person replicant effect and upon release almost immediately went viral.  On March 13, 2018 NBC crime drama The Blacklist used M-Dot’s audio single “True Lies” during episode 16 of season 5 titled “Capricorn Killer”. In February 2020 M-Dot released “The Atonement” produced by the iconic Pete Rock.  On January 28, 2022, M-Dot released the album “Dining in Dystopia” featuring Elzhi, Kool G Rap, Conway The Machine, Large Professor, Esoteric (rapper), Big Shug & more. The album received high praise and glowing reviews from news outlets, blogs and radios including okay player, DigBoston & shade 45. On June 17, 2022 logic (rapper) released his album Vinyl Days on Def Jam, the lead single with DJ Premier, also titled Vinyl Days, featured vocal samples from M-Dot for the tracks chorus and outro. 
In 2008 M-Dot was named to Stuff Magazines Hot 100.  Also in '08 M-Dot shared the honor of "2 Dope 2 Sleep On" with Casey Veggies presented by 2dopeboyz.com. He went on to receive positive reviews for his mixtapes Money Doesn't Own Thought (2009) from DigBoston.com  and Making Doubters Over Think (2010) from the Boston Globe.  Continuing his European exposure, M-Dot performed at the 2010 Winter XGames  in Tignes, France. For years he has solidified a fan base through local shows  and mixtapes in New England. 
M-Dot won both major Boston hip-hop music awards in 2010: at the 22nd annual Boston Phoenix awards, Best Hip Hop Act, and at the 23rd annual Boston Music Awards, Hip Hop Artist of the Year. He then went on to win Hip Hop Dependency "Artist of the Year 2011" M-Dot garnered more accolades for his first EP, a collaborative effort with DJ Jean Maron, Run MPC.
The Run MPC single "You Don't Know About It" Ft. Masta Ace reached number 2 on RapAttackLives.com  college radio charts and the 12 inch record finished fifth in vinyl sales in 2010 at undergroundhiphop.com.His third installment in his acronym series, More Doubters Over Thinking, was also well received. In May 2012 in support of the release "Layer Cake,"  M-Dot embarked  on a 33-day European tour  with the likes of Slaughterhouse (group), Saigon (rapper) & El Da Sensei. The Layer Cake cd was also considered another example of acute lyricism. Layercake  finds M-Dot weaving a go-for-the-gold battle-rap narrative over beats from young producers The 2007 Cinematic feature "Street Team Massacre " used songs M-Dot created for the score.
M-Dot can also be seen acting in the comical sitcom "What it is", which stars and is also produced by Makzilla & Krizz Kaliko.  On October 11, 2012, M-Dot was featured on ABC's (New England WCVB) primetime TV show "Chronicle". Hip Hop Kemp, which is statistically one of the largest music festivals in Europe, named M-Dot, amongst others, to be a headlining performer at the events 18th edition (taking the stage August 24, 2018 in Hradec Králové, Czech Republic).


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===
Run MPC (2010)
EgO anD The EneMy (2017)
Dining In Dystopia (2022)
A Dissolute Paradise (EgO anD The EneMy 2) (2023)


=== Mixtapes ===
Money Doesn't Own Thought (2009)
Making Doubters Over Think (2010)
More Doubters Over Thinking (2011)
Layer Cake (2012)
Jake LaDotta (2014)
KEMPilation (2018)


=== Appearances ===
DTR45 - “Gotta Be w/ Krumb Snatcha (Gang Starr Foundation)” from Rebel Radio 45, Album (2008)
Snowgoons - “Hate on me w/ Krumb Snatcha (Gang Starr Foundation)” from Trojan Horse, Album (2009) Baby Grande Records
Commonwealth Records presents - “No Money Down” from A Boston State of Mind (Compilation), Album (2010) Commonwealth Records
Snowgoons - “The Real & The Raw w/ Jaysaun (Special Teamz)” from Kraftwerk, Album (2010) ihiphop Distribution/Goons MuSick
DJ Doom - “False Acts” from Temple Of Doom, Album (2011)
King Syze (AOTP) - “History in the making” from Collective Bargaining, Album (2011) Enemy Soil
DJ Whiteowl - “Nothing To Fool With w/ Hell Rell (The Diplomats) & Benefit” from Drop that pt. 189 Holiday Hustlin' Edition 2, Mixtape (2011)
DJ Duke (Assassin (rap crew)) - “Tap Out (Remix) w/ Big Shug (Gang Starr Foundation)” from Dirty Hands Vol 2, Mixtape (2011)
Red Eye (The Closers) - “Unfukwitable w/ Ruste Juxx, Reks, Reef the Lost Cauze, Shabaam Sahdeeq, Sha Stimuli, Nutso” from St. Fatrick's Day, Mixtape (2012)
DJ Brans - “Worldwide w/ Armageddon (Rapper) Terror Squad (group)” from BranStorm, Album (2012) Effiscienz
DJ Brans - “DJ Brans All Starz w/ Nutso, Wildelux, King RA, B.A.M., DebOnAir, Wyld Bunch, Dirt Platoon, Blaq Poet & DJ Djaz" from BranStorm, Album (2012) Effiscienz
DJ Grazzhoppa & Smimooz - "Think Twice (Remix) w/ Big Shug, Avirex, Singapore Kane, Krumb Snatcha", from Solid Vs. Gold, Album ('12 inch Vinyl LP) (2012) 9mm
Snowgoons - “The Legacy w/ Esoteric, Ill Bill, Godilla, Fredro Starr (of Onyx), Sicknature, Punchline, Reks, Thirstin Howl the 3rd, Planetary (of Outerspace), Virtuoso, Maylay Sparks, Swann, Sav Killz & Reef The Lost Cauze" from Dynasty, Album (2012) Baby Grande Records
DJ Doo Wop - “Gangster Aquarium" from Underground: Coast to Coast, Mixtape (2012)
Snowgoons - "You Don't Know About it" (Remix) w/ Masta Ace, from This is Goons MuSICK, Mixtape (2012) Goons MuSICK
DJ Grazzhoppa - "Introduction", from Intricate Moves 2, Album ('12 inch Vinyl LP) (2013) Chess Moves Cartel/Cheebawax/Island Def Jam Digital
DJ Low Cut - "Visionaries w/ Jaysaun (Special Teamz), Nutso, Block McCloud, Blacastan, B.A.M, Chaundon, Tribeca & Shabaam Sahdeeq", from France Finest NY Minute Remix LP, Album (2013) Rugged Records
Whatson - "Sold My Soul To Rock N Roll w/ Planetary OuterSpace, & Aims" (Produced By Whatson) from Detour EP (2013)
Virtuoso (Army of the Pharaohs) & Snowgoons - "Ted Koppel w/ Vital Knuckles of N.B.S" (Produced By Snowgoons) from CoVirt Ops: Infantry, Album (2013) Goon MuSick/Big Bang Records
Snowgoons - "Still Real And Raw w/ Jaysaun (Special Teamz) & Journalist 103” (Produced By Snowgoons) from Black Snow 2, Album (2013) Goon MuSick
Revalation - "We're From Mass w/ Termanology" (Produced By Gajos) from Feature Presentation, Mixtape (2013) EMS Productions
DJ Nefarious - “Ground Up w/ Edo G Undu Kati of EMS and DJ Djaz” (Produced by DJ Nefarious) from Classic Mindset, Album (2014) Self-Released
Big Shug - "Showtime" (Produced By DJ Brans) from Triple OGzus, Album (2015) Brick Records
DJ Stylus and AniPsal - "Back to it w/ Big Twins of Infamous Mobb & Dro Pesci” (Prod. By DJ Stylus) from Plowon (2016) Hiphop Regenerates
Philly G & Quiz - “From the Bottom To the Top” (Produced By Quiz) from The Crib, EP (2017) Own Lane Music
DJ Low Cut - “The Payback w/ Revalation & Mayhem of EMS” (Produced By DJ Low Cut) from Dead End, Album (2017) Rugged Records
Superior - “Earn It w/ Revalation Of EMS” (Produced By Superior) from The Journey, Album (2017) Below System Records
El Da Sensei ‘n Chillow - “H.R.M w/ Reap” (Produced By Chillow) from We Bring it live, Album (2017) Catharsis-Productions
Mayhem & Soulslicers - "Patriots w/ Edo G & Big Shug” (Produced By Soulslicers) from Soul It May Seem, EP (Album Release TBD) (2018)
DJ Stylus Mixtape pas si nase "RAP DAZE w/ Ras Kass & Revalation of EMS” (2018) Voisinage Clothes Brand
DJ Brans - “Parisian Nights” (Produced By DJ Brans) from Out of Nowhere, Album (2018) Effiscienz
Soulslicers - “Chances and Change Remix w/ Skyzoo, Revalation of EMS and DJ Decepta” (Produced by Soulslicers) from Black Album, Album (2018) Own Lane Music
Soulslicers - “Late Homework w/ DJ 7L” (Produced by Soulslicers) from Black Album, Album (2018) Own Lane Music
B Leafs - "Reaganomics w/ Elzhi, Ras Kass, & Large Professor” (Produced By B Leafs) from The Horizon, Album (2018) Masterpeace Recordings/ RareMinerals
Guilty Simpson & Reckonize Real - “Can’t Run Away w/ Mayhem of EMS” (Produced By Reckonize Real) from Carved By Stone, Album (2018) Fat Beats
Slim One - “No Mercy For Pigs w/ Ren Thomas & Superstah Snuk” (Produced By Slim One) from Iconic, Album (2019) TuffKong Records
A.J. Munson - “Guilty w/ Ruste Juxx” (Produced by A.J. Munson) from Cigarettes and Coffee, Album (2019) Chopped Herring Records
DZ The Unknown - “Thunder Slap w/ Celph Titled, Big Shug & Esoteric” (Prod. By C-Lance) (Album Release TBD) (2019) Real Human Records
Panik of Molemen (producers) - “Biscuits” (Produced by Panik) from Coloring Outside The Lines, Album (2019) Molemen Records
Big Shug - “Keep It Cool w/ B.A.M & International Dreez” (Produced by Lil Fame of M.O.P.) from The Diamond Report, Album (2019) Brick Records
Big Shug - “No Real Rappers w/ Singapore Kane” (Produced by Reel Drama) from The Diamond Report, Album (2019) Brick Records
Akrobatik - “Migrate” (Produced by LX Beats) from AKLX, Album (2019) KPC Records
Kore & Quiz - “No Exceptions” (Produced by Kore) from Space Heaterz, EP (2020) Own Lane Music
Roccwell - “Roadrunner“ (Produced by Roccwell) from Still Lovin‘ Boombap, Album (2020) Vinyl Digital
G Stats (Bankai Fam) & Raf Almighty (Dirt Platoon) - “Chase The Dragon“ (Produced by Rawmatik) from The Ruler Gods, Album (2021) Kriminal Beats/Kush Gong Vinyl
Freddie Black & Ras Beats - “Hands Up“ (Produced by Ras Beats) from Black Beats, Peyote Cookies And Late Nights, Album (2021) Worldwyde Recordings
DJ Jean Maron - “Be Together w/ Raena“ (Produced By DJ Jean Maron) from The Candy Box, Album (2021) Soulspazm
Bugsy H. - “Ski Lift w/ Fat Lip of the Pharcyde” (Produced By MindFrame) from The Sanctuary, Album (2021) HRS ENT
Brutal Caesar - “Changing Of Times w/ Craig G of the Juice Crew & Doap Nixon of Army of the Pharaohs” (Produced By Brutal Caesar) from Caes Kalpurnia, Album (2022) Bruton Sounds
Rico James - “Gold Medal Sh*t w/ Copywrite & Double A.B.” (Produced By Rico James) from Language Of Spirits, Album (2022) Man Bites Dog Records
B Leafs - “Matatan w/ Estee Nack, Codenine & Al.Divino” (Produced by B Leafs) from The Synopsis, Album (2022) Masterpeace Recordings
Dub Sonata - “Another Day w/ Revalation & Bobby J From Rockaway” (Produced By Dub Sonata) from Tranquilizer Dart, Album (2022) Man Bites Dog Records
SoulRocca - “Toil“ (Produced by Roccwell) from In Good Company, Album (2022) Beat Art Department
D’Vibes - “Superbad w/ Philly G” (Produced By D’Vibes) from The Book of D’Vibes (2023) DVibes Productions


== References ==

https://web.archive.org/web/20111120171211/http://kevinnottingham.com/2010/04/30/artist-spotlight-m-dot/ Interview By Kevinnottingham.com]"
http://www.platform8470.com/interviews/interview.php?intid=189 Interview By Platform Mag]"


== External links ==
M-Dot on Twitter
M-Dot DiscogReminisce Kioni Mackie (née Smith; born May 30, 1980), known professionally as Remy Ma, is an American rapper. Discovered by Big Pun, she came to prominence for her work as a member of Fat Joe's group, Terror Squad. In 2006, she released her debut studio album There's Something About Remy: Based on a True Story, which became a modest success, peaking at number 33 on the Billboard 200 chart. Ma's most commercially successful songs include "Whuteva", "Ante Up (Remix)", "Lean Back", "Conceited", and "All the Way Up".
She is one of only four multiple winners of the BET Award for Best Female Hip-Hop Artist, which she won in 2005 and 2017. Ma is the recipient of two Vibe Awards, two Source Awards, and has been nominated for four Grammy Awards. From 2015 to 2020, she starred on VH1's reality series Love & Hip Hop: New York, alongside her husband Papoose.


== Life and career ==


=== Early life and career beginnings ===
Smith was born in The Bronx, and grew up in Castle Hill Projects. She was exposed to her family's drug abuse at an early age. She was forced to take care of her younger brothers and sisters at a young age and retreated from her home life issues by writing poetry. Her reputation spread around the Bronx, eventually getting the attention of Big Pun. After a meeting and freestyle session, Pun took Ma under his wing and became her mentor. Ma kickstarted her singing career under the name "Remy Martin" on Big Pun's album Yeeeah Baby, where she was featured on the tracks "Ms. Martin" and "You Was Wrong".


=== True Story, There's Something About Remy: Based on a True Story (2004–2006) ===
After the death of Big Pun, rapper Fat Joe signed Ma to his imprint label under SRC and Universal where she became a member of his hip hop group Terror Squad. She appeared on their second and final album, True Story, released on July 27, 2004. Their single, "Lean Back", topped the Billboard Hot 100 for three weeks from August 21, 2004, garnered Ma her first Grammy nomination.
On February 7, 2006, Ma released her debut album There's Something About Remy: Based on a True Story, which was supported by the singles "Whuteva", "Conceited" and "Feels So Good". The album was a critical success, however a disappointment financially, moving 37,000 units in its opening week and 158,000 units within the first year. Remy was frustrated at the way the album was being promoted by Universal and tensions between her and the label caused a rift between Ma and Fat Joe. Ma and Universal parted ways, and she severed her associations with Joe and the Terror Squad.


=== Incarceration, mixtapes (2007–2014) ===
On February 13, 2007, Ma told Billboard that she was working on her second album, PunisHer, as well as a collaboration album as part of the all-female rap supergroup 3Sum, alongside female rappers Shawnna and Jacki-O.In July 2007, Remy was arrested for shooting Makeda Barnes-Joseph at a Manhattan nightspot. She was found guilty on assault, weapons, and attempted coercion charges; on May 13, 2008, she was sentenced to eight years in prison. She maintained that the shooting was an accident.While incarcerated, she released the mixtapes The BX Files, Shesus Khryst and Blasremy. In 2011, Ma's music was featured and discussed in the documentary Black Lifestyle in Japan, where she was praised for her style and listed as one of the most frequently listened to hip-hop musicians in Japan, among younger women.Ma was released from prison in 2014 after serving six years in prison. On October 31, 2014, she released the mixtape I'm Around. On April 28, 2015, she released Remy on the Rocks, a compilation of various tracks from her mixtapes.


=== Love and Hip Hop and television career, Plata O Plomo (2015–2017) ===
On July 7, 2015, Ma announced that she was joining Love & Hip Hop: New York for its sixth season, along with her husband Papoose. She has continued to appear on the show as a series regular in seasons seven, eight, nine and ten, as well as starring in the spin-off show Remy & Papoose: Meet the Mackies, and the specials Remy & Papoose: A Merry Mackie Holiday, Dirty Little Secrets, The Love Edition, Love & Hip Hop Awards: Most Certified and 40 Greatest Love & Hip Hop Moments: The Reboot.
In 2016, Fat Joe revealed that he and Ma would be releasing a joint album. On March 2, 2016, the joint album was officially announced as Plata O Plomo, which translates from Spanish to "silver or lead". The phrase was used by Colombian drug lord Pablo Escobar, who would offer government officials and law enforcement the choice of taking a bribe, or having a murder contract placed against them. The album's first single, "All the Way Up", was released the same day. "All the Way Up" was a critical and commercial success, receiving platinum certification from the RIAA, and two Grammy Award nominations. Plata O Plomo debuted at number 44 on the Billboard 200 with first-week sales of 11,158 album-equivalent units. The album received generally favorable reviews from music critics, despite lukewarm commercial success. XXL gave the album a 4 out of 5 stars, noting that the album is a "a triumphant return" for the duo.On August 20, 2017, Ma opened a women's clothing store, Conceited in Raleigh, North Carolina.


=== Reminisce (2017–present) ===
On November 16, 2017, Ma released "Wake Me Up", the first single from her upcoming album, then titled 7 Winters, 6 Summers. It featured fellow New York rapper Lil' Kim and a sample from Kim's "Queen Bitch" from the 1996 album Hard Core. On January 19, 2018, Ma released the album's second single "Melanin Magic", featuring vocals by Chris Brown and using a sample from Mint Condition's "Breakin' My Heart (Pretty Brown Eyes)." On April 26, 2018, Ma released the song "Company" featuring fellow Bronx artist A Boogie wit da Hoodie. On June 12, 2018, Ma released  "New Thang", with rapper French Montana, from the soundtrack for the film Uncle Drew.Since September 10, 2018, Ma has appeared as a host on the talk show State of the Culture with Joe Budden.In March 2020, Ma announced during an appearance on radio show The Breakfast Club that the title of the album had been changed to Reminisce, and that a release date was being decided. In 2021, Ma starred in the film 6:45, as the character Cassi.


== Personal life ==
Smith married Shamele Mackie, better known as fellow rapper Papoose, in February 2016. The couple were initially scheduled to be wed while Smith was incarcerated in 2008, but the wedding was called off after police caught Mackie attempting to smuggle a skeleton key into prison and banned him from visiting her for six months.Remy Ma has one child from a previous relationship, as well as three stepchildren with Papoose. She gave birth to the couple's first child together, Reminisce Mackenzie, on December 14, 2018.


== Legal issues ==
On July 13, 2007, Smith turned herself in to New York City police in relation to a shooting early that morning outside a Manhattan delicatessen. Police say that while she was with a group of people outside the Pizza Bar, a Manhattan nightspot, a verbal confrontation broke out at 4 a.m. During the incident, a gunshot to the torso wounded Makeda Barnes-Joseph, who had been accused of stealing three thousand dollars from Smith. Police sources indicate that Barnes-Joseph later identified Smith as the shooter. Security tapes from inside the club showed no evidence of any altercations or arguments. Smith pleaded not guilty to charges of attempted murder, assault, and criminal weapon possession. Smith was later charged with witness tampering and assault after an August 2007 incident in which she was accused of leading several male friends to attack a witness's boyfriend.On March 27, 2008, Smith was convicted of assault, illegal weapon possession and attempted coercion in connection with these charges. She was immediately taken into custody pending sentencing scheduled for May 13. She was acquitted of witness tampering and gang assault. At her sentencing, the judge noted her disregard for the victim following the shooting—commenting that the rapper rifled through the victim's purse looking for the alleged stolen money, as Barnes-Joseph sat seriously wounded in the car. Smith then exited the vehicle, jumped into a waiting car and drove off, leaving Barnes-Joseph bleeding in the front seat. No money was found in Barnes-Joseph's purse.
The shooting caused Barnes-Joseph to undergo several surgeries. In 2007, Barnes-Joseph filed an $80 million civil lawsuit against Smith for damages, along with pain and suffering. According to her lawyers, Smith was serving an eight-year term at the Bedford Hills Correctional Facility for Women in Bedford Hills, New York, located in Westchester County and was expected to be released in 2015.
Smith married her fiancé, rapper Papoose, while incarcerated in May 2008. During an interview with Hot 97 host Funkmaster Flex in July 2012, Smith announced that in 22+1⁄2 months she would be released.In February 2014, her husband Papoose confirmed that Smith should be released during July 2014. On August 1, 2014, Smith was released from prison after serving six years. In October 2018, Smith launched a new clothing line, with proceeds going to the Remy Ma Foundation to help women and their families who have been negatively affected by incarceration.After being investigated by the NYPD for allegedly assaulting Brittney Taylor, one of her Love & Hip Hop co-stars, Smith turned herself in to the authorities on May 6, 2019. On December 2, 2019, all charges were dropped due to lack of evidence.


== Controversies ==


=== Foxy Brown ===
A beef between Remy Ma and Foxy Brown originated in August 2004, when an interviewer noted to Remy: "Right now, it's a lack of female rappers in the game. Foxy don't got anything going on," Remy Ma responded: "How do I feel about them? Stay wherever they at, don't drop a song, don't do nothing, let me be the only one. I'm having so much fun. I hope they never come out. Nah, I wish everyone the best of luck. Just don't drop when I drop. That's all I got to say. Matter of fact, just don't drop at all. It'll even be better." In September 2004, Remy recalled that after a rap battle with Lady Luck at Fight Klub, her refusal to "show some type of seniority or respect" to Brown became one of the building blocks in the feud. Remy also recalled that during the incident the two were arguing over a future rap battle, where Brown declined and allegedly stated, "What? A battle? That's for beginners. We sell records in Brooklyn!" Remy dissed the rapper, responding, "When the last time you sold a record? Get the fuck out of here. I'd rather be a beginner that's on fire than be a washed-up veteran. Are you fucking serious? Don't try to degrade what I do." Remy additionally revealed that a prize of over $200,000 was offered to whoever won the rap battle.Another building block to the feud was Remy's recollection of her and Brown coincidentally being interviewed at the same events either "before or after" each other, where she would catch wind of Brown "subliminally" dissing her by making statements like: "I've been doing this for years. These new chicks, they('re) not on (my level)." In another event, specifically a Baby Phat after-party, Foxy Brown intentionally tried to bump into Remy. The occurrence resulted in strands of Brown's weave getting caught in Remy's bracelet, causing Remy to snatch her wrist back and yank out the strands. Remy recalled that Brown in response "kept it moving (despite a scuffle) she had with "regular" girls in a bathroom (over cutting in line)."In late January 2005, Remy Ma reportedly punched Foxy Brown inside Island Def Jam/Universal offices, roughly a few days after Brown "subliminal" disses Remy during a venue at Jay-Z's Best of Both Worlds Tour and allegedly dissed her during a Hot 97 interview segment with DJ Clue, where Brown disses Remy on a mixtape track ("We Hustlaz") and allegedly ranted: "Who drives 645's? That's wack. We sell records [in New York]. We don't just get on the radio station and pop shit." In February 2006, Remy Ma released a freestyle record ("Most Anticipated") that contained "slick comments" about Brown's hearing problem and stated that she didn't care if it was offensive because "it was just good punchlines". In September 2006, Remy again joked about Brown's hearing, addressing to a radio show: "now Foxy suddenly got her hearing back, (I) wanted to be the first to inform her that she's wack and old."In July 2007, during her interview with Sub 0 Magazine, Foxy Brown dissed Remy Ma, stating: "When you lookin' at Fox(y) and Kim and sayin', 'Damn y'all make me wanna rap.' Well shit you disappointing me 'cause you sound horrible. You look horrible, ya sound horrible. If it walk like somethin', talk like somethin', act like somethin', then it is somethin'." Brown also dissed Remy's recollection of their disagreement over the rap battle, addressing: "Some of these female rappers have the wrong approach, they wanna be my friend. And instead of approaching me like, '"Hey, how you doing", another chick (Remy), 'Yo, what up with that battle?' And I'm lookin' at her like, 'You bum ass. Naw, I don't do that, I'm a business woman baby.'" In December 2007, Remy spoke more candidly on her dispute with Brown. She confirmed that although she disliked Brown as a person, she admitted she liked Brown's music and added that she was influenced by her and Lil' Kim. Remy later concluded her take on the feud by giving a shout-out to Brown's rival Jacki-O and stating, "If you look at every female that came out after (Foxy Brown) or when she came out with (Lil') Kim, to Eve, me, Jacki-O, it even got to Latifah, like how do you (get in a fight) with Queen Latifah? Like, are you serious? This chick is a problem."
In 2017, Foxy released a new single called "Breaks Over", a diss track aimed at Remy.


=== Nicki Minaj ===

Disagreements between Nicki Minaj and Ma originated in 2007, when Ma took note of Minaj's freestyle record, nicknamed "Dirty Money", from her mixtape Playtime Is Over (2007), which uses the beat to "Yeah Yeah Yeah" by Terror Squad, a song that Ma rapped on. In the record, Minaj recites: "Tell that bitch with the crown to run it like Chris Brown/she won three rounds, I'ma need a hundred thou/like 'Chinatown' — bitches better bow down/oh you ain't know, betcha bitches know now/fuck I got a gun — let her know that I'm the one", which many believed to be a reference to the crown Ma wore in the music video for "Whuteva". Minaj reportedly never confirmed or denied that the song was about Ma, however, Ma remarked in a 2010 interview: "To this day I still feel like (the song) is a stab at me; I'm gonna (diss Minaj) back for that one". Although Ma and Minaj shared words of encouragement, their relationship soon soured, and they began releasing verses and songs with lyrics aimed at each other, including Ma's "Money Showers" with Fat Joe and Minaj's "Swalla" with Jason Derulo & "Make Love" with Gucci Mane.On February 25, 2017, Ma released "Shether", which contained a number of accusations and allegations regarding Minaj's personal and professional life. She followed this with "Another One".On the March 3, 2017, episode of The Wendy Williams Show, Ma accused Minaj of "trying to keep (her) off of red carpets" and "trying to make sure awards don't go to (her)". A week later, in an interview hosted by BuzzFeed, Ma stated that she had second thoughts about releasing the diss track and commented on the difficulties of being a woman in the music industry. Minaj subsequently responded with the song "No Frauds", in which she accused Ma of spreading falsehoods and made fun of Ma's poor record sales with Plata O Plomo.On June 12, 2017, Ma took the stage at Hot 97's Summer Jam. During her performance, she brought out Queen Latifah, Young M.A, Lil' Kim, MC Lyte, Lady of Rage, and Cardi B to perform "U.N.I.T.Y." After the group left the stage, Ma launched into a performance of "Shether", while photos of Minaj were displayed on the stage screen behind her. During the performance, she repeatedly directed f-bombs at Minaj.


== Discography ==

Studio albums

There's Something About Remy: Based on a True Story (2006)Collaboration albums

True Story with Terror Squad (2004)
Plata O Plomo with Fat Joe (2017)


== Filmography ==


=== Film ===


=== Television ===


=== Documentary ===


== DVDs ==
Remy Ma: From the Grind to the Glamour (2006)
Shesus Khryst (2007)
INDUSTRY VS. THE STREET: 5 MOST DANGEROUS HOODZ – JIM JONES / CHAMILLIONAIRE / REMY MA / FREEWAY


== Awards and nominations ==


=== BET Awards ===


=== BET Hip Hop Awards ===


=== Soul Train Music Awards ===


=== Grammy Awards ===


=== Bronx Walk of Fame ===
Inducted in 2022


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Hope, Clover (2021). The Motherlode: 100+ Women Who Made Hip-Hop. Harry N. Abrams. ISBN 978-1-4197-4296-5.


== External links ==
Official Website
Remy Ma page at MTVRaymond Yu (born February 5, 1982), known professionally as China Mac, is an American rapper, entertainer, activist, and former gang member.


== Early years ==
Yu was born and raised in Brooklyn to Chinese immigrants, from Hong Kong. He moved into a group home at the age of 8. Yu joined the Ghost Shadows gang when he was 12. In his teenage years, he would partake in freestyle rap battles with other kids at the juvenile detention center.


== Career ==


=== 2000–2013: Incarceration ===
At the age of 18, Mac was sentenced to three years in prison for gang related crimes in 2000.On November 9, 2003, Mac was involved in an altercation with MC Jin at a bar in Chinatown, Manhattan, where he shot Jin's acquaintance, rapper Christopher "LS" Louie, in the back. Mac later went on the run for over a year and was apprehended in Seattle, Washington when he tried to leave the country with a fake passport. In prison, he was nicknamed "China Mac" by the Mac Ballers gang. He was released on parole in November 2013 and founded the Red Money Records record label and pet store with the money he saved up while in prison.


=== 2014–present: Music production & activism ===
Mac returned to prison for an accused parole violation and was later released in 2017. Since then, he has uploaded video content, including the food show Mac Eats, onto his YouTube channel, China Mac TV.Mac released his album MITM in 2017.In 2018, Mac was a prominent critic of Lil Pump's single "Butterfly Doors", which used the pejorative ching chong slur.In 2019, he released the dual EP, Yin and Yang. That same year, Mac released a Chinese/Spanish record with Tali Goya.In July 2020, amidst the rise in anti-Asian hate crimes during the COVID-19 pandemic in the United States, an 89 year old Chinese grandmother was assaulted and set on fire in Bensonhurst, Brooklyn. Mac and actor Will Lex Ham organized a march in that neighborhood on August 1, 2020 as a response to raise awareness about anti-Asian hate crimes. The "They Can't Burn Us All" rallying cry has transformed into a national protest for "unity amongst all people against hate crimes and racism." The duo later held rallies in both Los Angeles and San Francisco. These events have garnered hundreds to participate.China Mac's activism led him to release the single "They Can't Burn Us All" on October 30, 2020.


== Personal life ==
His father was a part of the Chinese-American gang, Flying Dragons, that was active in the 1980s.


== See also ==
Stop Asian Hate—a series of demonstrations, protests, and rallies against violence targeting Asians and Asian Americans in 2021


== References ==


== External links ==
China Mac on Instagram
China Mac on YouTubeMach-Hommy is a Haitian-American rapper and record producer. He is well-known for his reclusive nature, concealing his real name and face in all public appearances. This behavior has led him to be described as "one of hip-hop's most elusive artists".Mach-Hommy has gained a cult following as a result of his work ethic and elusiveness. His lyrics are often heavily related to the social and political history of his Haitian heritage. Though he predominantly raps in English, he also frequently incorporates Haitian Kreyòl into his lyrics. He forbids lyric sites to post transcriptions of the words to his songs, and he charges hundreds and even thousands of dollars for his releases, most of which are not available on streaming services.


== Early life ==
Mach-Hommy was raised predominantly in Newark, New Jersey, but also spent much of his childhood in Port-au-Prince. His father was a folk guitarist, and Mach credits his father's musical style as an influence on his own. The first music Mach recorded was at the age of 13, when he performed a freestyle over the beat to Raekwon's "Verbal Intercourse".In his early career, Mach found the music recording process to be an "unhealthy" environment and sought to take up filmmaking instead. However, at the encouragement of Westside Gunn, he returned to rapping in the early 2010s.


== Career ==
Mach-Hommy first received widespread attention after the release of his 2016 album, H.B.O. (Haitian Body Odor), which he sold via Instagram. Mach pressed only 187 copies of the H.B.O. CD and sold them for $300 apiece, before eventually uploading the album to SoundCloud in 2017. He released numerous other albums in the following years, many of which were sold at high prices through services like Bandcamp and never released on streaming services.In 2021, Mach-Hommy released his album Pray for Haiti on most streaming services. Mach stated that he would donate his share of profits from the album to the Pray for Haiti Trust Fund, a charity he established to fund educational services and institutions in Haiti. Pray for Haiti also brought Mach a greater level of attention from the music press, with Pitchfork honoring the album with a "Best New Music" award and Rolling Stone describing it as "a modern hip-hop classic".Mach-Hommy has intermittently associated with the Griselda Records label. Though Mach was once considered part of the Griselda collective, he separated from them after a falling-out with Westside Gunn, and as of 2017 Mach-Hommy was unaffiliated with the label. Mach and Gunn eventually reconciled in late 2020, as Westside Gunn served as an executive producer of Pray for Haiti.


== Personal life ==
In an interview with Billboard.com, Mach stated that he was fluent in all of the Romance languages.


== Influences ==
Mach-Hommy cites a wide range of writers as influential upon him, including William Shakespeare, Chinua Achebe, George Orwell, Lorraine Hansberry, Fyodor Dostoevsky, and Dante. He also cites political and philosophical thinkers such as Malcolm X, C. L. R. James, Thomas Aquinas, and Friedrich Nietzsche. He cites Prodigy and Mobb Deep as musical influences.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===


=== Compilation albums ===
Supertape (2012)
MHz (2017)


=== EPs ===


=== Guest appearances ===


=== As Executive Producer ===
TGIF by Tha God Fahim (2016)
Wide Berth by Tha God Fahim (2018)
Dump Olympics: Wide Berth by Mach-Hommy & Tha God Fahim (2018)
It Wasn't Even Close by Your Old Droog (2019)
Jewelry by Your Old Droog (2019)
Dump YOD: Krutoy Edition by Your Old Droog (2020)
Tha YOD Fahim by Your Old Droog & Tha God Fahim (2021)
Block Barry White by Big Cheeko (2022)


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Mach-Hommy's channel on YouTube
Mach-Hommy discography at DiscogsCraig Jamieson Mack (May 10, 1970 – March 12, 2018) was an American rapper and record producer, and was famous during his tenure under Bad Boy Records.


== Early life and career ==
Craig Jamieson Mack was born in The Bronx, New York, and raised on Long Island. He began rapping as a teenager under the name MC EZ. His first single, "Get Retarded", was released in 1988 via Fresh Records. The single was backed with and credited as MC EZ & Troup.
Mack became friends with fellow Long Island hip hop act EPMD and eventually went on tour with the duo, doing jobs as a roadie. After a few years without forward movement in his recording career and EPMD's breakup, Mack took advantage of an opportunity that Alvin Toney made possible for him to rap for Sean Combs. Mack then secured a record deal with Combs's newly founded label, Bad Boy Records.
Mack is best known for his 1994 hit single "Flava in Ya Ear", which was released under his real name. The remix of the single was the breakout appearance of The Notorious B.I.G., as well as one of the first solo appearances by Busta Rhymes. While Mack was technically the first rapper to release music on Bad Boy Records, the success of The Notorious B.I.G.'s debut album Ready to Die, which released exactly seven days before Mack's debut album Project: Funk da World, overshadowed Mack's early success on the label.Although Sean Combs mentioned in a 1994 interview on MTV's Yo! MTV Raps that he was working with Mack on his second album, which was to be released sometime in January 1995, this proved to not be the case. Present at that interview (which also included The Notorious B.I.G.), Mack himself appeared puzzled by the statement. Mack did release a second album in 1997 without Bad Boy, but none of the singles charted and Mack was unable to repeat his success. In an interview, The Notorious B.I.G. says he appeared on the remix of "Flava in Ya Ear" for political reasons for Combs. In 2002, Mack would appear in the music video for Puffy's single "I Need a Girl (Part One)".After a few attempts to return to success in the early-2000s, it was said that Mack was working on his third studio album in 2002, which was set to be released in 2007. The single "Mack Tonight" was released for the album in 2006.
Mack was absent from the hip hop industry until in 2012, when a video was leaked on YouTube saying he had joined a Christian ministry, surprising family members and fans. From 2012 until his death, Mack resided in the Overcomer Ministry located in Walterboro, South Carolina. The Overcomer Ministry is a secluded Christian commune that has been described as a cult, and whose leader Brother Stair has been charged with various crimes, including assault and sexual conduct with a minor. The Overcomer Ministry's YouTube channel released a video, "Craig Mack Testimony", on May 22, 2016, in which Mack appears in the middle of the church to rap about Christianity through a remix of "When God Comes". The last part of the video entails a full version of the song with better production quality and a beat. The song expresses his personal beliefs. Mack planned to stay in the ministry and said that he had no intentions to come back to mainstream rap. The song also mentions that he "moved [his] family to South Carolina", which did not align with other reports expressing the family's concerns for his choices. According to the video, Mack felt he was doing "wickedness" in New York, and "righteousness" in South Carolina.On November 26, 2012, Beazylife Distribution released a new Craig Mack mixtape, Operation Why2K? – Hosted by B-Eazy, through DatPiff.com. In 2017, The Mack World Sessions was released, containing 18 previously unreleased tracks. Dutch record label MECSMI released the That's My Word mixtape, hosted by DJ Tape Deck King, via DatPiff and YouTube on August 20, 2018. On November 25, 2018, 'That's My Word' posthumously won Mixtape of the Year at Bout Dat Online's Audio Dope Awards. This marked the first time Mack had won an award since "Flava In Ya Ear" won Single of the Year at the 1995 Source Awards.


== Personal life and death ==
Mack was married and had two children, a son and a daughter. Among his close friends was rapper and beatboxer Biz Markie.Mack died on March 12, 2018, from heart failure at a hospital near his home at Walterboro, South Carolina. According to DJ Scratch, he was ill for some time before his death and was prepared for a grim outcome. Mack was apparently suffering from heart failure, having developed shortness of breath from around six months before his death when, according to rapper Erick Sermon, he called his friends to bid farewell.Following Mack's death, Sermon wrote on Twitter that he was finishing work on Mack's newest album.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===


=== Singles ===


=== Music videos ===


== References ==Kellee Maize is an American rapper, singer, and songwriter. Her first album, Age of Feminine, was released in 2007. Maize has recorded and released six full albums and several singles.


== Early life ==
Maize was born in Reading, Pennsylvania, and was adopted by Terry and Christine Maize, who lived in New Berlin, a small town in Central Pennsylvania. At 9 years old, she started her first rap group, Thunder and Lightning. Maize graduated from Mifflinburg Area High School. In her teens, she moved to Pittsburgh and in 2000 began rapping and singing on stage, but financial needs led her to the workforce. At 18 years old, Maize began studying at the University of Pittsburgh as a drama major and later switched her major to communications.Maize worked at the Pittsburgh City Paper and began promoting events around the city. She was soon promoted to the position of events and promotions director. After experiencing her mother going through cancer and the sudden passing of her father, Maize again turned to music as a way to cope.


== Career ==


=== Early career ===
In 2006 Maize founded Näkturnal, a Pittsburgh-based guerrilla marketing firm. Maize remains the owner and CEO of the company and uses the company to promote her own music.Maize released her first rap album, Age of Feminine, independently in June 2007. The album features traditional hip hop beats. The 11-song album received positive reviews with over two million listens and over one hundred thousand downloads. Her second album, Aligned Archetype, was released in January 2010. The album features the sounds of dubstep, hip hop, and Baltimore club. The album became the featured album for FrostWire, where she became the Most Downloaded Artist on FrostWire, with over 135,000 full album downloads in one month.


=== Integration to present ===
Maize's third album, Integration, was released on November 11, 2011. The album received immediate attention as it was downloaded over 100,000 times within its first month of being released on FrostWire. At the time, the success of this album helped her become the most-downloaded artist on Amazon. In June 2011, she performed at Bonnaroo in Tennessee. She performed a 45-minute set list along with long-time collaborator DJ Huggy. Maize then began work on her fourth studio album and released the single "Google Female Rapper", a freestyle over Twista’s popular song, "Overnight Celebrity".During an interview in 2012 with XXL, Maize said she would like to change hip hop by "rapping and singing about things that aren’t found in mainstream hip hop like yoga, environmentalism, oneness, spirituality, beings from other dimensions, and indigenous wisdom."Maize's fourth album, Owl Time, was released December 12, 2012.
Her fifth album, The 5th Element, was officially released on Valentine's Day 2014. The album had been available exclusively to the Jamendo community 10 days prior. By the 15th of February, The 5th Element had gathered over 90,000 plays and over 6,000 downloads on Jamendo. The main theme of The 5th Element has been cited as love. The album design features over 1,000 fans that sent pictures of themselves displaying love in whatever way they saw fit.Her sixth album, The Remixes, was released in 2015 and released nine remixes of Maize's songs.She launched her acting career in June 2017, appearing as the character Popp in the Adult Swim show Decker.


== Personal life ==
Maize reconnected with her biological family at 22 years old. Her biological father is actor Jimmy McNichol, who fathered her at age 18, and her biological aunt is former actress Kristy McNichol. Maize and McNichol unsuccessfully pitched a television special, which they hoped could tell their story of reconnecting. Through McNichol, Maize has two siblings. Maize is married to Joey Rahimi and has three children, one son and two daughters.As of 2016, Maize lives in the Shadyside neighborhood of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.


=== Activism and spirituality ===
Maize is an activist on women's rights, environmentalism, and issues relating to poverty and racism. Her spiritual side is reflected in her music. She studies world and environmental issues, the power of intention, meditation, quantum physics, astrology, Tarot and indigenous wisdom. In 2012, of her meditation practice, Maize said, "I learned Transcendental Meditation many years ago and found it to be life changing."In 2013 Maize performed at Zeitgeist Media festivals in Los Angeles and New York City supporting The Zeitgeist Movement. Maize also appeared in TZM founder Peter Joseph's short documentary Culture in Decline 6: Take of Two Worlds. In 2020 she appeared in Peter Joseph's movie InterReflections singing "Welcome to the Freak Show" song.
Maize has said that she "has issues with politics" but supported Hillary Clinton in the 2016 Presidential Election. She released a single, "#MakeLoveNotTrump" online on October 19, 2016, in opposition to candidate Donald Trump.


== Awards and nominations ==
In polls taken by the Pittsburgh City Paper, Maize was voted in the "Top 3 Best Hip Hop Performers" three years in a row (2008–2010). In 2010, Maize was nominated as "Best Female Artist at the Pittsburgh Hip Hop Awards".Maize's single, "City of Champions", which was on her album, Aligned Archetype, competed against Wiz Khalifa's "Black and Yellow" as the Pittsburgh Steelers’ favorite "Road to the Super Bowl" song.In 2011, Maize was nominated as one of Pittsburgh Magazine's and PUMP's 40 Under 40. The award recognizes individuals that are committed to shaping Western Pennsylvania.


== Discography ==
Discography:

Age of Feminine (2007)
Aligned Archetype (2010)
Integration (2011)
Owl Time (2012)
The 5th Element (2014)
The Remixes (2015)
"#MakeLoveNotTrump" - single (2016)
Crown (2017)


== Filmography ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website 
Kellee Maize at IMDb
Jamendo profileMalik Abdul-Basit Smart (November 14, 1972 – July 29, 2020), better known by his stage name Malik B., was an American rapper and singer who was a founding member of the Roots. He appeared on the first four albums released by the Roots, before departing the group. He returned as a featured artist for some later albums. He released one EP, entitled Psychological, on MC Haak Blast's publishing company Future Blast Publishing. He also released two studio albums, Street Assault (2005) and Unpredictable (2015) with Mr. Green.


== Career ==
On the Roots' seventh studio album, Game Theory, released in August 2006, Malik B returned to the group, appearing on three tracks, including the title "Game Theory" (track 3; listed as 116 on North American releases), "In the Music" (track 5; listed as 118 on North American releases), and "Here I Come" (track 8; listed as 121 on North American releases). The nature of his relationship with the group was indicated by the fact that his tracks were billed as "featuring Malik B". In the liner notes, the Roots thanked Malik B, adding the statement: "Welcome Home". Malik B was also featured on two tracks on the Roots' 2008 album Rising Down, "I Can't Help It" and "Lost Desire".
Malik B, along with the rest of the Roots, was featured on MC Solaar's 1994 album Prose Combat.
Malik B's last work before his death included a collaboration album with New York-based producer Mr. Green, and being a featured member of the Philadelphia rap collective Beard Gang which includes fellow Philadelphia artist Freeway.


== Death ==
Malik B died on July 29, 2020, at the age of 47. The cause of death was not released.


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===
Street Assault (2005), F.D.M.E.
Unpredictable (with Mr. Green, 2015), Enemy Soil


=== EPs ===
Psychological EP (2006), F.D.M.E.


== References ==Rahkeim Calief Meyer (born February 11, 1978), better known by his stage name Roc Marciano, is an American rapper, songwriter, and record producer.


== Career ==
Roc Marciano started his career in 1999 when he joined the Flipmode Squad and made his first appearances on “Whatcha Come Around Here For” and “The Heist". Marciano left in 2001 to form the U.N., a hardcore underground hip hop group consisting of three other MCs (Dino Brave, Laku & deceased member Mic Raw) with whom he released an album on Carson Daly's 456 Entertainment in 2004. Roc Marciano appeared on the 2005 Wu-Tang Clan compilation album, Wu-Tang Meets the Indie Culture, and in Pete Rock's 2008 album, NY's Finest, drawing acclaim for such performances. Since 2008, Roc Marciano has been working on his solo career, and to widespread internet acclaim, released his entirely self-produced debut album, Marcberg on May 4, 2010 to critical acclaim.
In 2011, Roc Marciano collaborated with Gangrene to release the collaborative EP Greneberg. His second solo album, Reloaded, was released on November 15, 2012, which Allmusic described as "Grim and exultant at once, this is low-profile hustling on wax at its finest." He also collaborated with Kendrick Lamar and Consequence on Up Against the Wall which is featured on Consequence's mixtape, "Movies on Demand 2".In late 2013, Marciano released a free mixtape, The Pimpire Strikes Back. The mixtape served as preface to his third studio album, Marci Beaucoup, that was entirely produced by him and had featured artists such as Action Bronson, Evidence, Ka, Maffew Ragazino, Quelle Chris and more.
On February 21, 2017, Roc Marciano released his fourth studio album Rosebudd's Revenge via his website RocMarci.com. The album features Ka and Knowledge the Pirate, frequent Roc Marciano collaborators, and production from The Arch Druids, Mushroom Jesus, Modus Op, Knxwledge, and Roc Marciano himself.
On February 27, 2018, Marciano released his fifth studio album Rosebudd's Revenge 2: The Bitter Dose, via his website RocMarci.com. The album features guest appearances from Knowledge the Pirate and Action Bronson and production from E.L.E.M.N.T., Animoss, Don Cee, and Roc Marciano himself.
Freemusicempire named Roc Marciano as 2018 MVP. Dan-O commented "Our newly crowned FME MVP of 2018 released three albums this year. Each handled with a curators eye; three albums with a total of 36 songs which averages to 12 songs per album. Each one shading his story a different hue, taking a step further in creating a full landscape while maintaining a two fisted approach to punch lines that would have made prized pugilist Rocky Marciano proud."


== Discography ==

2010: Marcberg
2012: Reloaded
2013: Marci Beaucoup
2017: Rosebudd's Revenge
2018: Rosebudd's Revenge 2: The Bitter Dose
2018: Behold a Dark Horse
2018: Kaos (with DJ Muggs)
2019: Marcielago
2020: Mt. Marci
2022: The Elephant Man’s Bones (with The Alchemist)


== References ==


== External links ==
Marcberg review
Marcberg review and Marciano biography
Roc Marciano talks about the U.N.
The Prophecy EP Re-Issue by GoodfelonsMarcel Theo Hall (April 8, 1964 – July 16, 2021), known professionally as Biz Markie, was an American rapper and singer. Markie's 1989 single "Just a Friend", became a Top 40 hit in several countries and was named No. 100 on VH1's list of the 100 greatest hip-hop songs of all time in 2008. Markie was sometimes referred to as the "Clown Prince of Hip Hop".


== Early life and education ==
Markie was born in Manhattan in the neighborhood of Harlem, New York City, on April 8, 1964. He was raised on Long Island in the hamlet of Brentwood and the village of Patchogue, where he spent his teenage years and where, on September 25, 2021, the intersection of South Street and West Avenue, across the street from his then-home, was dedicated as Biz Markie Way. He graduated from Longwood High School in Middle Island in 1982. Markie began his career in New York City nightclubs and later gained regional recognition by performing at colleges in Washington, D.C., Maryland, Virginia and Pennsylvania.
Regarding the origin of his stage name, the rapper said:

Biz comes from the first hip-hop tape I heard. It was '77, '78, from the L Brothers. Grand Wizard Theodore was the DJ, and the rappers was Kevvy Kev, Master Rob and Busy Bee Starski. I loved Busy Bee. Busy Bee just stuck with me. My name used to be Bizzy B Markie, and after a while I put the Biz with the Markie. My nickname in my neighborhood was Markie.


== Music career ==


=== 1980s ===
Biz Markie was interviewed in the 1986 cult documentary Big Fun in the Big Town. Markie released his debut album Goin' Off in 1988, which attracted a fair amount of attention, largely due to the lead single, "Make the Music with Your Mouth, Biz". The album also featured the underground hit singles "Nobody Beats The Biz", "Vapors", and "Pickin' Boogers". Biz also appeared briefly in the music video for Rob Base's single "It Takes Two".
On October 10, 1989, Markie's second studio album, The Biz Never Sleeps was released on Cold Chillin'/Warner Bros. Records, produced by Markie, his cousin Cool V and Paul C. The single "Just a Friend", in which he alternates between rap and caterwauling, became Markie's most successful single, reaching No. 9 on the Billboard charts. The song interpolates the 1968 song "You Got What I Need" by singer-songwriter Freddie Scott, whose basic chord and melody provided the base for the song's chorus. "Just a Friend" was ranked 81st on VH1's 100 Greatest One-Hit Wonders in 2000, and later as number 100 on VH1's 100 Greatest Songs of Hip Hop in 2008. The music video, directed by Lionel C. Martin, chronicles the rapper's woman problems.


=== 1990s ===
Markie's third studio album I Need a Haircut was released on August 27, 1991, on Cold Chillin'/Warner Bros. Records; it was produced by Markie and his cousin Cool V. Sales of the album were already low when Markie was served a lawsuit by Gilbert O'Sullivan, who claimed that the album's "Alone Again" featured an unauthorized sample from his hit "Alone Again (Naturally)". O'Sullivan's claim was upheld in a landmark ruling, Grand Upright Music, Ltd. v. Warner Bros. Records Inc. that altered the landscape of hip-hop, finding that all samples must be cleared with the original artist before being used. In accordance with the ruling, Warner Bros., the parent company of Cold Chillin', had to pull I Need a Haircut from circulation, and all companies had to clear samples with the samples' creators before releasing the records. This development reflected the increasing popularity of hip-hop and the financial stakes over which were set. Markie responded in 1993 with the mischievously titled All Samples Cleared!, but his career had been hurt by the publicity emanating from the lawsuit, and the record suffered accordingly.For the remainder of the decade, Markie occasionally made television appearances, including guest appearances on In Living Color; as contestant Damian "Foosball" Franklin in the recurring game show sketch "The Dirty Dozens"; as Marlon Cain in "Ed Bacon: Guidance Counselor"; in a 1996 freestyle rap commercial on MTV2; and in the 1993 superhero film Meteor Man. He also made numerous guest appearances with the Beastie Boys on Check Your Head (1992), Ill Communication (1994), Hello Nasty (1998), and their anthology The Sounds of Science (1999). He also rapped on the song "Schizo Jam" on Don Byron's 1998 release, Nu Blaxploitation (Blue Note/Capitol) and worked with Canibus on the first track on the Office Space soundtrack (1999). He also rapped on the track "So Fresh" alongside Slick Rick on Will Smith's 1999 album Willennium.In 1996, Markie appeared on the Red Hot Organization's compilation CD, America Is Dying Slowly, alongside Wu-Tang Clan, Coolio, and Fat Joe, among others. The CD was meant to raise awareness of the AIDS epidemic among African-American men. In 1997, a sample of a Markie recording appeared in the Rolling Stones' song "Anybody Seen My Baby?" from their album Bridges to Babylon. Markie also teamed up with Frankie Cutlass on his third single and music video titled "The Cypher Part 3" with some of Marley Marl's Juice Crew veterans. He also appeared of Fünf Sterne Delxue Will Smith, Meer Gayne? from the album Sillium.In 1999, Markie appeared on Len's song "Beautiful Day" on their album You Can't Stop the Bum Rush, as well as on Alliance Ethnik's album Fat Comeback.


=== 2000s ===
In 2002, Markie appeared in Men in Black II, with Will Smith and Tommy Lee Jones, playing an alien parody of himself, whose native language sounded exactly like beatboxing. He also provided rap vocals and sang the hook for the remixed version of Mario's single "Just a Friend 2002", which sampled his own song from 13 years before. Between 2002 and 2003, he appeared in episode 5 of the TV series Fastlane playing himself as a nightclub DJ. In 2003, he appeared in the international television series Kung Faux performing a series of voice-over characters featured in a variety of episodes.  In 2005, Markie detoured from his recording duties to appear on the first season of the television show Celebrity Fit Club, which challenged celebrities to lose weight by a combination of diet and exercise. Markie lost more weight than anybody else in the competition. That year, he was also in an episode of The Andy Milonakis Show. In 2006, his song "Pickin' Boogers" appeared on the soundtrack of the Volition video game Saints Row. Markie was a special guest on Nick Cannon's Wild 'n Out on season 1 and a cast member on season 4. Markie also had a beatboxing segment, "Biz's Beat of the Day", on the Nick Jr. Channel show Yo Gabba Gabba!Markie began opening in 2008 for Chris Rock on the comedian's "No Apologies" tour. Markie's act included spinning records ranging from old school hip hop to Lynyrd Skynyrd and then performing "Just a Friend". In December 2009, Biz Markie appeared in a RadioShack commercial, repeating the line: "Oh Snap! Guess what I saw!" from his song "Just a Friend". That same year saw his debut with Andy Milonakis in television commercials for the commercial Internet service Tune Up.


=== 2010s ===
In 2010, Markie appeared on VH1's 100 Greatest Artists of All Time, providing commentary throughout the series. Markie himself was not included on the list. On November 9, 2010, he appeared on the Aquabats! new EP, Radio Down! on the title track. On November 11, 2010, Markie sat in with the Roots on Late Night with Jimmy Fallon, and performed "Just a Friend" with actor Jeff Goldblum.In 2013, Markie toured with the Yo Gabba Gabba! live show. That year, his song, "Just a Friend" was featured in Saints Row IV, which included the Pop station, 107.7 The Mix FM. He appeared on the Cartoon Network show Mad, as the Hip Hop Hobbit. He voiced Rudd Rhymez's DJ Tiny Timmy Scratch It in the Randy Cunningham: 9th Grade Ninja episode "Hip Hopocalypse Now".Markie guest starred in the SpongeBob SquarePants episode "Kenny the Cat" in the episode's title role. His voice acting work also includes the voice of Snorlock the Beatboxing Slug in an episode of Adventure Time.In 2014, Markie appeared in the Syfy network film Sharknado 2: The Second One. That same year, he threw a ceremonial first pitch for an Oakland Athletics baseball game. In 2016, his song, "Just a Friend" was featured in the Netflix Series Love as an ending theme for episode 4. He also made an appearance in the song "The Noisy Eater" off the album Wildflower by the Avalanches. Also in 2016, he appeared on the Fox TV series Empire as himself, where he performed "Just a Friend".Markie was the DJ on the VH1 game show Hip Hop Squares between 2017 and 2019, a spin-off of the popular game show Hollywood Squares. He also rapped alongside singer Ke$ha on the Flaming Lips song "2012 (You Must Be Upgraded)". He made an appearance in the season 3 finale of the ABC series Black-ish in 2017. He performed a personal version of the song "Just a Friend", in which he added the names of the characters.


=== 2020s ===
In 2020, Markie started hosting a radio show on SiriusXM on LL Cool J's Rock the Bells Radio (channel 43) every weekday from 1:00 to 4:00 EST.


== Legal issues ==
In 1991, Biz Markie was sued for copyright infringement by Gilbert O'Sullivan. Judge Duffy ordered the rapper to pay $250,000 in damages.In March 2022, Markie's widow, Tara Hall, sued Jennifer Izumi, his former business manager for damages and control of Biz Markie Inc. over widespread alleged intellectual property violations, including claims the manager stole song royalties and sold unauthorized merchandise.


== Illness and death ==
In April 2020, Markie was hospitalized due to severe complications from type 2 diabetes. In December 2020, it was reported that Markie was staying in a rehabilitation facility as a result of a stroke he had suffered after going into a diabetic coma.On July 1, 2021, rumors of his death circulated on Twitter. His representative told Rolling Stone, "The news of Biz Markie's death is not true, Biz is still under medical care, surrounded by professionals who are working hard to provide the best healthcare possible." Markie died at a Baltimore hospital 15 days later on July 16, at age 57. His wife, Tara Hall, held his hand as he took his last breath. He was buried at Pinelawn Memorial Park and Arboreum in Farmingdale, New York.


== Legacy ==
Upon news of his death, many celebrities and figures expressed their sympathies. His wife, Tara Hall, was sent condolences from President Barack Obama and his wife Michelle Obama. His funeral in Patchogue, NY was attended by friends and family, including the likes of Ice T, Fat Joe, Montell Jordan, and Al B Sure. His eulogy was read by Reverend Al Sharpton.In November 2022, Paramount Global announced that Showtime in conjunction with Mass Appeal would be releasing a documentary on Biz Markie's life. The documentary, All Up in the Biz, was directed by Sacha Jenkins. The movie features reenactments, interviews, and stock footage. Featured in the documentary are Big Daddy Kane, Rakim, Doug E Fresh, Nick Cannon, Tracy Morgan, his wife Tara Hall and more. The score was produced by Markie's friend Prince Paul.  In June 2023, Hall announced the Just A Friend Foundation and confirmed the documentary, All Up In The Biz, was premiering at the Tribeca Film Festival.The original vinyl from Gilbert O'Sullivan's album 'Back to Front', on which Biz Markie sampled 'Alone Again (Naturally)', can still be found today at the Médiathèque Musicale de Paris, a specialized music library located in Paris. Biz Markie visited the library during a trip to Paris in 1991, in search of samples for his album. At the time, the establishment was renowned among American and French hip-hop artists for its extensive collection of vinyl records available for self-service access.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===


=== Compilation albums ===


=== EPs ===


=== Singles ===


== References ==


== External links ==

In-depth Biz Markie interview Archived October 28, 2010, at the Wayback Machine
VH-1 biography
Biz Markie at IMDb
Official websiteMarlon Lu'Ree Williams (born September 30, 1962), better known by his stage name Marley Marl, is an American DJ, record producer, rapper and record label founder, primarily operating in hip hop music. Marlon grew up in Queensbridge housing projects located in Queens, New York. He performed in local talent shows during the early days of rap music, further fueling his interest.
He was also featured on Eric B. & Rakim's "Paid in Full" from their debut album, which was also recorded in his studio. 
He is credited with influencing a number of hip hop icons such as Biggie Smalls, RZA, DJ Premier, Madlib, and Pete Rock. Producer Madlib stated in an interview that Marley was the first producer who inspired him to make beats. Vibe magazine wrote that he, "forever changed the sound of hip-hop with his unique beat barrages."


== Early career ==
Marley's career started with an interest in electronica. As a young intern at Unique Recording Studios in the early 1980s, he had an opportunity to experiment with very expensive samplers like the Fairlight CMI. One day during a studio session with an artist named Captain Rock he discovered sampling by accident. "I was actually trying to get a riff off of a record. I made a mistake and got the snare in there before the sound came. I was truncating the vocal part but the snare was playing with the beat — we was truncating while the beat was playing. Thank God the beat was playing, because it probably wouldn't have happened if the beat wasn't playing. So I was playing it and the snare sounded better than the snare that I had from the drum machine when I was popping it."A short time later pioneering hip-hop radio DJ Mr. Magic heard Marley Marl's remix of Malcolm McLaren's Buffalo Gals, leading to Marley becoming his DJ. They eventually started the hip-hop collective the Juice Crew together in 1983. 1986 saw the foundation of Cold Chillin' Records, where Marley served as in-house producer for many projects. He earned $250,000 per year for his production work. The label was also home to many Juice Crew artists.
Marley caught his big break in 1984, with artist Roxanne Shante's hit "Roxanne's Revenge". In a 2008 interview Shante noted how seriously he took recording despite his limited setup. "We'd be recording in his living room on a reel-to-reel and four-tracks. I really just wanted to go to the mall after one take, but Marley always made me do it again."Another significant early record was 1985's "Marley Marl Scratch" featuring MC Shan. The song was recorded on a four-track cassette recorder and Shan used a mic with a missing ball to record his lyrics.Several of his early record feature inventive use of the Roland TR-808 drum machine. On MC Shan's 1986 Pop Art single "The Bridge', which later appeared on his 1987 album Down By Law, Marley used the 808 pulse to trigger different samplers. According to Biz Markie, the button on Marley's 808 stuck during the recording of his hit "Make the Music with Your Mouth, Biz", leading to sound heard on the record today. Juice Crew member Big Daddy Kane praised his ability to pair 808 drum sounds with sampled drums. "Regardless of how clean or brand-new the record was that he was sampling, or light the production may have been, he always gave it a really gritty feel when he sampled it. He always put the 808 to it and gave it a heavy bottom and warm feel."In the late 1980s, the Juice Crew gained increased attention from mainstream publications. Spin magazine wrote, "they've produced some of the genre's toughest, most uncompromising music." At the time Marley began a streak of producing entire albums for several Juice Crew members. He produced all of the tracks on Craig G's The Kingpin (1989), Big Daddy Kane's Long Live The Kane (1988), Biz Markie's Goin' Off (1988), Kool G Rap & DJ Polo's Road to the Riches (1989), MC Shan's Down By Law (1987) and Born to Be Wild (1988), and Roxanne Shante's Bad Sister (1989).
In 1988, he produced the Juice Crew posse cut "The Symphony" by using a Hal Jackson record from the WBLS record library as a sample source.


== Post-Juice Crew and Cold Chillin' ==
In 1996, Marley filed a suit against Cold Chillin' for unpaid royalties.In 2007 he produced the entire Hip Hop Lives album for former rival KRS-One.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===
In Control, Volume 1 (1988)
In Control Volume II (For Your Steering Pleasure) (1991)
Hip-Hop Dictionary (2000)
Re-Entry (2001)


=== Collaboration albums ===
Hip-Hop Lives (with KRS-One) (2007)
Operation Take Back Hip-Hop (with Craig G) (2008)


=== Compilations ===
House of Hits (1995)
Best of Cold Chillin' (2001)
Marley Marl's House of Hits (released 2007)
Hip Hop's Hero w/ Nikal Fieldz (released 2010)


== Popular culture ==
Marl was referenced on Biggie Smalls' track "Juicy" as being one of Smalls' early influences.


== References ==


== External links ==
AllMusic biography
Facebook page
Marley Marl discography at Discogs
Marley Marl at IMDbMark D. Ross (born April 4, 1966), better known by his stage name Brother Marquis, is an American rapper and a Miami bass pioneer. Ross was born in Rochester, New York, in his teens, and with his mother, they moved to Los Angeles, California. By the early 1980s, Ross started to release music with his group The Cautious Crew, and shortly after he made an impression DJ and producer David Hobbs (Mr. Mixx) due to his battle rap abilities. At the time Hobbs, was part of a group named 2 Live Crew, who had just created the Miami Bass blueprint, and were successful in Florida. Eventually a member of the group left, and Ross accepted an invitation to replace him. Due to his comedic sensibilities, Ross integrated easily into the direction the group was taking. Alongside Hobbs, Christopher Wong Won (Fresh Kid Ice), and Luther Campbell (Luke Skyywalker), they became the most well-known line up of the group. In 1986, they had a breakthrough with their Gold-certified debut album, The 2 Live Crew Is What We Are.
The group success came with controversies due to the explicit nature of their humor, however they continued their rise to fame with their second album, Move Somethin' (1988), which also went gold. Their third album As Nasty As They Wanna Be (1989), was certified Platinum. However, the group met with considerable controversy as a U.S. district court ruled the album legally obscene. They were prosecuted, but all were later acquitted. Prior to a group's separation, they made two more albums which went Gold Banned in the U.S.A. (1990) and Sports Weekend: As Nasty as They Wanna Be, Pt. 2, (1991).
In the early 1990s, Ross embarked on various musical endeavors. He formed the duo 2 Nazty with DJ Toomp and released the album Indecent Exposure in 1993, showcasing his versatility and prowess. During the same year, Ross was a featured rapper on Ice-T's album "Home Invasion," contributing to the original version of "99 Problems," which later was remade by Jay-Z into a top charting hit.
In 1996, Ross, Wong Won, and Hobbs reunited as 2 Live Crew and released the album Shake a Lil' Somethin', which reached #145 on the Billboard 200 and #33 on the Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums chart. In 1998, Ross and Wong Won released The Real One, which peaked at #59 on the Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums chart, marking the final 2 Live Crew album to date.
In 2006, Ross and Wong Won, as 2 Live Crew, reunited, started touring, released singles, and made several album announcements, until Wong Won's death in 2017.


== Early life ==
Born on April 4, 1966, Ross explained that he spent his early life in Rochester, New York, with his mother, and in his teens, they moved to Los Angeles, California.


== Career ==


=== 1983–1986 Early career, joining 2 Live Crew and the group's breakthrough ===
In 1983, Ross and fellow rapper Rodney-O, as The Caution Crew, released twelve-inch singles, "Westside Storie" and "Rhythm Rock". Ross explained that they were created during his time living in California while he was in Junior High. Ross explained that his rapper's name, Brother Marquis, was coined by his cousin, who, due to his Muslim faith, frequently referred to others as "Brother." The two would engage in Islamic practices and spend time together in a Grand Marquis car. Over time, his cousin began calling him Brother Marquis."Eventually, he caught the attention of music producer and DJ David Hobbs, also known as Mr. Mixx, who was part of the rap group 2 Live Crew, which had gained popularity in Miami, Florida. Hobbs said "I knew Marquis from parties in Riverside. He would battle people and beat them senseless. I met him in the parking lot of a mall and told him if I ever get a chance, I’m going to bring you in."When one of the group members eventually departed, Ross flew to Florida to join 2 Live Crew alongside Hobbs, Christopher Wong Won (Fresh Kid Ice), and Luther Campbell (Luke).When Ross arrived, they had already completed the 1986 single "Trow The D. And Ghetto Bass". The song "Trow The D" became the blueprint as to how future Miami bass songs were written and produced. The group was initially known for their sexually explicit and comical content. Regarding Ross's comedic talents and adaptation to the group's style, Hobbs noted, "he was always naturally funny. Since the stuff was coming off of comedy records, it went hand in hand with him."Ross was 19-year when he joined, and his first recording with the group was the song "Word".In 1986, the 2 Live Crew release their Gold-certified debut album, The 2 Live Crew Is What We Are.


=== 1988–1991: Best selling 2 Live Crew albums and attendant controversy ===
In 1988, 2 Live Crew released their second studio album, Move Somethin'. The album was also certified Gold. and featured the singles "Move Somethin'" and "Do Wah Diddy Diddy". Move Somethin' improved on the charts from the previous album, making into #68 on the Billboard 200 and #20 on the Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums charts.
2 Live Crew's third studio album As Nasty As They Wanna Be (1989), became the group's biggest seller, certified Platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America. In 1990, the United States District Court for the Southern District of Florida ruled that the album was legally obscene; but this ruling was later overturned by the Eleventh Circuit. As Nasty As They Wanna Be is the first album in history to be deemed legally obscene.In 1990, Ross and the 2 Live Crew released their fourth album Banned in the U.S.A., which was originally credited as Campbell's solo album featuring 2 Live Crew and in later editions credited as a 2 Live Crew album. The album included the hits "Do the Bart" and the title track. It was also the very first release to bear the RIAA-standard Parental Advisory warning sticker.  The eponymous title single was a reference to the obscenity decision from the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of Florida. Bruce Springsteen granted the group permission to interpolate his song "Born in the U.S.A." for the single.
Also in 1990, 2 Live Crew released Live in Concert, the group’s only live album, and their fifth album overall.  The album was released under the Effect label, a subsidiary label of Luke Records. The album peaked at #46 on the Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums chart.Sports Weekend: As Nasty as They Wanna Be, Pt. 2, the fifth studio album and sixth album overall by the 2 Live Crew was released in 1991 as a sequel of As Nasty As They Wanna Be.  A clean version was also released entitled Sports Weekend: As Clean As They Wanna Be Part II and was the sequel of As Clean As They Wanna Be.  Sports Weekend: As Nasty as They Wanna Be, Pt. 2 would be the final album released by the most well known line up 2 Live Crew members (Ross, Wong Won, Campbell and Hobbs).


=== 1992–2003: Subsequent 2 Live Crew success, featured rapper and solo project ===
After the group's separation, Ross relocated to Georgia, where he had friends and family. There, he ventured into stand-up comedy. Subsequently, Ross teamed up with Idrin Davis  (DJ Toomp) to form the duo 2 Nasty.In 1993, 2 Nazty and released the album Indecent Exposure. When discussing the album, Ross explained his intention to showcase diversity while staying true to the style that had made him famous. Greg Baker of Miami New Times praised the album, acknowledging that while some of the content might be offensive, he appreciated its diversity. Baker commented, "clever story lines and double-dope rhyme schemes are laid over skirt-flipping, ass-bumping beats as strong as any on the hip-hop market today." Regarding Ross's performance, Baker noted, "Marquis remains among the most charismatic of rap vocalists and contributes the "concepts" and many of the lyrics."That same year, Ross appeared as a featured guest on Ice-T's album Home Invasion by Ice-T on a song named "99 Problems". Ice T explained that the idea for the song "99 Problems" during a conversation about the single "Whoomp! (There It Is)" and its popularity in Magic City and that out of nowhere Ross said "Man, I got 99 problems, but a bitch ain’t one". Ice-T felt it sounded right for a song's name, and once he made it he invited Ross to do a verse. In 2003, a remake was made by Jay-Z and was a major hit.In 1995, Ross, Wong Won and Hobbs would reunite to release the single "Hoochie Mama" for the soundtrack to the movie Friday. The soundtrack reached #1 on the Billboard 200 chart, where it held its position for two weeks, and on the Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums chart for six weeks.
In 1996, Ross reunited with Wong Won and Hobbs under the 2 Live Crew banner to release the group's seventh studio album Shake a Lil' Somethin', whose eponymous single peaked at #11 on the Hot Rap Singles chart, The single "Do the Damn Thing" made it to #24 on the same chart, and "Be My Private Dancer" peaked at #34.In 1998, Ross, along with Wong Won, released The Real One the final 2 Live Crew album to date.  The album's single "2 Live Party" featuring KC of KC and the Sunshine Band and "Freak Nasty" peaked at #52 on the Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart and #9 on the Hot Rap Songs chart. The title single "The Real One", featuring Ice-T, peaked at #60 on the Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs and #9 on the Hot Rap Songs charts.In 2003, Ross released a solo project named Bottom Boi Style Vol. 1.


=== 2006–2010: Reforming and reuniting with 2 Live Crew ===
During 2006–07 Ross and Wong Won met, discussed their differences, and ultimately decided to relaunch 2 Live Crew. The duo made offers to past members (notably, Hobbs and Campbell) to re-join the group, but the offers were declined.In 2010, Ross and 2 Live Crew were honorees at the 2010 7th VH1 Hip-Hop Honors. In August, Wong Won and Ross announced the pending release of a 2 Live Crew album named, Just Wanna Be Heard.In late 2010, Ross and Wong Won released 2 Live Crew singles "I'm 2 Live" featuring rapper Mannie Fresh, "Cougar," and "Boom" featuring rapper E-40. The duo announced the pending release of an album, Just Wanna be Heard, that remains unreleased to this day.


=== 2011–present: Current projects ===
In 2011, Ross was a featured guest on the single "Steak & Mash Potatoes" by Chain Swangaz. A music video of the single featured Ross and Chain Swangaz as fast food employee who create havoc while their boss, played by Charlie Sheen, is gone.In 2014, Ross and Wong Won released the single "Take It Off". Also, Wong Won and Ross made cameo appearances in the Flo Rida music video "G.D.F.R."  That same year, the duo announced the pending release of a new 2 Live Crew studio album Turn Me On. Also that year, Wong Won and Ross reunited with Campbell for several performances.In 2016, Wong Won left 2 Live Crew and passed away in 2017, Ross reunited with Hobbs to reform the group. The duo released two singles How Bout Dem Cowboys and One Horse Sleigh in 2016 and continue to tour nationally as 2 Live Crew.


== Personal ==
Ross is an avowed born again Christian, but feels no moral restrictions performing sexually explicit lyrics in 2 Live Crew hits on tour or on recordings.In a 2015 YouTube interview, Ross stated that he has a daughter.


== References ==


== Works Cited ==
Howell, Theresa B.; Navarro, David R. (October 2021). "Exclusive Interview with Brother Marquis". The Heatseekers. No. 9. pp. 28–31


== External links ==
Brother Marquis at IMDb
Brother Marquis discography at DiscogsMyles Mills (born June 8, 1993), better known by his stage name Skizzy Mars, is an American rapper, songwriter, and record producer from Harlem, New York.


== Early life ==
Mills was born and raised in Harlem, New York to his father, a therapist, and his mother, who operated two daycare centers in Manhattan. He attended an all-boys school St. Bernard's School during his elementary years and later graduated from the Browning School. Mills attended Union College to originally pursue a sports journalism major, but he dropped out ten weeks after starting classes to begin his rapping career.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===


=== Extended plays ===


=== Mixtapes ===


=== Singles ===


==== As lead artist ====


==== As featured artist ====


=== Music videos ===


== References ==Theophilus A. Martins is an American artist, songwriter, and actor.  His output has drawn praise from outlets including The LA Times, GQ magazine, The Washington Post and Wallpaper Magazine.


== Life and career ==
Martins was born in Providence, Rhode Island. Martins credits his parents for the musical and artistic exposure gained throughout his upbringing. He noted that his mother found casting calls searching local newspapers while his father was a trumpeter and avid music collector.


== References ==


== External links ==
Theo Martins at IMDb
Official Soundcloud profile
Theo Martins Discography on DiscogsMason Durell Betha (born August 27, 1975), better known by his mononym Mase (formerly Murda Mase and stylized as Ma$e), is an American rapper. In the late 1990s, he recorded on the Bad Boy Records label alongside its founder Sean "Puff Daddy" Combs to significant mainstream success. In 1997 and 1998, Mase had a total of five platinum singles, five Hot Rap Songs number one singles, and six Billboard Hot 100 top ten singles, stemming from his guest features on Sean Combs' singles "Can't Nobody Hold Me Down" and "Been Around the World", the Notorious B.I.G.'s "Mo Money Mo Problems", as well as his singles as a lead artist: "Feel So Good" (featuring Kelly Price), "What You Want" (featuring Total) and "Lookin' at Me" (featuring Sean Combs). Both "Can't Nobody Hold Me Down" and "Mo Money Mo Problems" topped the Billboard Hot 100.
Mase's 1997 debut album Harlem World was certified quadruple platinum by the RIAA. His subsequent two albums, Double Up (1999) and Welcome Back (2004), have been certified gold.


== Early life ==
Mase was born Mason Durell Betha in Jacksonville, Florida, on August 27, 1975, as a fraternal twin born almost two months premature, to P. K. Betha and Mason Betha. He grew up with two brothers and three sisters, including his twin sister, Stason, born a few minutes after him. Their father left the family when Mase was just three years old. In 1980, his mother moved with her children to Harlem, New York, where Mase spent the majority of his childhood. During his early teenage years, Betha began getting into trouble on the streets of Harlem, and when he was 13 his mother sent him back to Jacksonville to live with relatives. It was while living in Jacksonville that Betha first began attending church. After returning to live in Harlem at age 15, Betha began showing promise as a basketball player, becoming the leading point guard for his team at Manhattan Center High School during the 1993 season, where he played alongside Cameron Giles, who went on to be known as the rapper Cam'ron. He had hopes of joining the National Basketball Association (NBA), but was unable to make it into a Division I College due to his poor academic scores. He attended State University of New York at Purchase, where he grew to realize he was unlikely to make the NBA and instead began focusing more on writing music, producing demo tapes, and regularly performing at local nightclubs. Betha eventually dropped out of college and focused on his music career full-time.


== Career ==


=== 1993-97: Children of the Corn and Bad Boy record deal ===
After Betha returned to Harlem, he and his childhood friend Cam'ron began rapping as a hobby under the names Murda Mase and Killa Cam, briefly forming a group known as the Children of the Corn ("corn" short for "corner") with fellow Harlem rappers Big L, Herb McGruff, Six Figga Digga and Bloodshed. Damon Dash, a fellow Manhattan Center student, was the group's manager for a while. In 1996, Mase's sister Stason introduced him to Cudda Love, a road manager for the Notorious B.I.G. Cudda took then 20-year-old Mase to Atlanta, Georgia, where Jermaine Dupri and Sean "Puff Daddy" Combs were attending a rap convention. Shortly after meeting and rapping for Puff Daddy at the Hard Rock Café, Mase signed a $250,000 deal with Bad Boy Records. Within a week of signing to the label, Betha had his stage name shortened from Murda Mase to simply Mase to make him more marketable and was featured on and in the video for 112's "Only You" with the Notorious B.I.G. He also appeared on numerous hit songs with other Bad Boy artists, including Puff Daddy's "Can't Nobody Hold Me Down" and "Been Around the World" and the Notorious B.I.G.'s "Mo' Money, Mo' Problems", which reached No. 1 on the Billboard Hot 100.


=== 1997-98: Harlem World ===
Mase's first studio album, Harlem World, debuted at No. 1 on the Billboard Pop and R&B LP charts, selling over 270,000 copies in the U.S. during its first week of release. It has since achieved 4× Platinum status in the United States. The album spawned hit singles such as "Feel So Good" and "Lookin' at Me", which both reached No. 1 on the Rap Billboard charts, as well as "What You Want", which peaked at No. 3 on both the Rap and R&B Billboard charts. During 1997, Mase also appeared on more songs with Puff Daddy, Mariah Carey's "Honey", Brian McKnight's "You Should Be Mine (Don't Waste Your Time)", and Brandy's "Top of the World".
In 1998, Mase formed his own record label, All Out Records. He signed his group Harlem World, which included his twin sister, Stason, to the label while they were also under So So Def Recordings. He and Harlem World member Blinky Blink were featured on Blackstreet & Mýa's song "Take Me There", which appeared on the soundtrack of The Rugrats Movie.


=== 1999: Double Up and retirement ===
Mase's second album, Double Up, was released in 1999 on Bad Boy and sold 107,000 copies in its first week, debuting at No. 11 on the US Top 200 chart. In Double Up Mase's lyrics became more aggressive.On April 20, 1999, during an interview with Funkmaster Flex on New York radio station Hot 97, Mase announced his retirement from music to pursue a "calling from God". He claimed he was "leading people, friends, kids and others down a path to hell", stating that he left to find God in his heart and follow him. He said it was time for him to serve God in "his" way, saying rap was not real, and that he wanted to deal with reality and had become unhappy with what he did, no matter how much money it had made him. The same year, Mase enrolled as a freshman at Clark Atlanta University, a historically black college, and began taking classes on August 19. Unlike other freshmen, Mase was permitted to live off campus and commute, but he is said to have downplayed his past as a rapper and stayed fairly low-key while on campus.


=== 2004: Return to music ===
After a five-year hiatus from music, during which he became an ordained minister, Mase made his return to music with Welcome Back in summer 2004. Welcome Back was accompanied by a single of the same name and was released on August 24, 2004, through Bad Boy Records and distributed by Universal Music Group. It debuted at No. 4 in the US, selling 188,000 copies in its first week of release, and eventually went gold, selling 559,000 copies in the United States. The album portrayed Mase's new Christian lifestyle and "cleaner" image. Mase dubbed himself "a Bad Boy gone clean" on the lead single (which samples the Welcome Back Kotter theme song). This new approach had a mixed reception. Although the album was not as big a commercial success as Harlem World, the singles "Welcome Back" and "Breathe, Stretch, Shake" received moderate radio airplay and video play on BET and MTV, with the latter single reaching No. 28 on the US Billboard Hot 100. Both singles were also certified gold by the RIAA.
In the mid-2000s, Mase spent time touring and recording with New York hip-hop group G-Unit, and became a mainstay of 50 Cent's public image during that time, appearing with him on magazine covers, on stage, and in music videos. He has since said that working with the group was not something he regrets, but that the message he was sending was a mistake. He joined G-Unit to appeal to a different audience so they could see that they could change just as he did, thinking that "in order to get people where I'm at, I have to go back to where I once was". Under G-Unit, he released Crucified 4 The Hood: 10 Years of Hate, a mixtape from the DJ Whoo Kid series, but an official album was never released.


=== 2009: Second comeback ===
Following the formula that worked for him years earlier, Mase has begun to appear on R&B artists' remixes. In early June 2009, he was featured on the last verse of "Uptown Boy" by Harry O, signed to The Inc. Records, which also features Ron Browz. Weeks later, Mase appeared on a street remix for Drake's "Best I Ever Had". Mase stated that Michael Jackson's death influenced him to make a comeback. He appeared on Power 105.1 to discuss his comeback with "The Prince of New York" DJ Self. Mase used that radio show as his outlet to release new music throughout the rest of the summer, with a new song or feature premiere every Friday on DJ Self's show.
The first new track featuring Mase was released on July 10, featuring the first verse on "Get It," which was produced by Big Ran and also featured Cam'ron. Mase released the Ron Browz produced "Thinkin' 'Bout You" on July 17, then followed that up by adding a verse to the street remix of Teairra Marí and Kanye West's "Diamonds", on July 24. Mase used the last Friday in July to "Shut the City Down," which was the title of his second solo release since his comeback began. The song primarily discusses the rapper's legacy and makes reference to the ways in which rap, as a business, has changed since his heyday. He also makes reference to his new Batman-esque logo, and hints at himself as hip-hop's superhero. Mase released the song "Radio" on August 21 as a prelude to his upcoming mixtape "I Bleed Money." On September 11, Mase was one of the featured artists who appeared on the remix to Ron Browz's "Gimme 20 Dollars." This was the third time since his comeback that he worked with Browz and his first collaboration with Jim Jones since their falling out years before.
In October 2009, Mase made an impromptu appearance on a live radio interview with Diddy-Dirty Money on V-103. He told the studio staff he brought documentation that would release him from the Bad Boy label and gave the forms to Diddy during the interview. Diddy signed the forms and announced "[Mase] has the freedom to go do whatever he wants to do." It was later revealed the forms did not end Mase's contractual obligations to the record label, but rather allowed him to appear on songs with artists from different labels.


=== 2010–present: Now We Even ===
In 2010, Diddy offered Mase a one-year release from Bad Boy to settle all their differences, with which Mase decided to retire from rap for good although he was to be re-signed to Bad Boy after the year was up. On April 17, 2012, Spiff TV Films – a production company best known for videos made for Rick Ross's Maybach Music releases – tweeted a photo of Mase, Ross and French Montana, as well as Omarion and Rico Love, together in the studio. The picture sparked speculation that Mase would be making his third return to music since his announced retirement to become a pastor in April 1999 and leaving again in 2007. A week after the photo appeared, DJ Funkmaster Flex debuted a remix of Wale's "Slight Work" on radio show.
Speaking during an on-air call following the remix's debut, Mase didn't address rumors about him possibly signing with Warner Bros. imprint Maybach Music, rather revealing that French Montana was the reason Mase was making his third comeback. Mase is served as an A&R representative on Montana's forthcoming Bad Boy debut, Excuse My French, as well as appearing on the remix of Montana's "Everything's a Go". "I'm not sure what kind of decisions he's going to make," Montana says, "[but] I would love to see him in my camp." In September 2012, Mase appeared on Kanye West's album Cruel Summer, on the track "Higher" with The-Dream, Pusha T, and Cocaine 80s.
In December 2012, Mase announced that he was no longer signed to Bad Boy, saying he would not likely sign with a major label anytime soon. He told MTV the only two labels he would consider signing with were Kanye West's GOOD Music or Drake's OVO Sound. On October 18, 2013, Mase announced his next album would be titled Now We Even. He also said his wish list for guest appearances would include Jay-Z, Diddy, Beyoncé, Drake, 2 Chainz, Lauryn Hill, Meek Mill, Fabolous, Ariana Grande, Dipset, Eric Bellinger, Seal and CeeLo Green.On November 24, 2017, Mase released "The Oracle", a diss track at friend-turned-rival Cam'ron in response to the lyrical jabs Cam'ron aimed at him on his mixtape The Program.


== Legacy and influence ==
Mase's melodic rap style has had an enduring influence on hip hop. Many rappers, such as Pusha T, Fabolous and Kanye West, have adopted Mase's lazy, yet melodic flow on several occasions. Jay-Z and Drake among other rappers have borrowed Mase lines in their songs. Kanye West has described Mase as his favorite rapper ever.


== Writings ==
Revelations: There's a Light After the Lime (2001)


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===
Harlem World (1997)
Double Up (1999)
Welcome Back (2004)


== Filmography ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Mase at IMDb
El Elyon International ChurchJamel Irief (born Elgin Evander Turner; August 18, 1969), better known by his stage name Masta Killa, is an American rapper and member of the Wu-Tang Clan. Though one of the lesser-known members of the group (he was featured on only one track on their 1993 debut album Enter the Wu-Tang (36 Chambers)), he has been prolific on Clan group albums and solo projects since the mid-1990s. He released his debut album No Said Date in 2004 to positive reviews, and has since released three additional albums.


== Career ==
I never performed until we launched Wu-Tang. That was my first time as an MC. I have history since elementary school doing talent shows. Breaking and shit like that. I was that kind of dude. I loved to pop. That was me. Always doing shit around music. As far as with a mic in my hand, Wu-Tang was the first time. There never was next level for me. It was Wu-Tang and that was it. I never tried to get on. Never looked for any of this, because it was never my vision. I'm kinda like hanging out with GZA, and just stumbled across some shit. "Oh word?" And I was like, "Maybe I can do this." When I was young going to clubs, I was just hanging out. I never went in there like I was trying to be an MC. I never tried to get a record deal, or pass out tapes. It's just been Wu-Tang and I'm here.
Born in Brooklyn, New York City, Masta Killa was the last member to join the Wu-Tang Clan; consequently he did not appear on the group's debut single "Protect Ya Neck". He was also the only member who was not a rapper at the time of the group's formation. He was extensively mentored by the GZA during his early days with the group, evident in the similar flow they both employ. He derived his rap name from the 1978 kung fu film Shaolin Master Killer, (Shao Lin san shi liu fang). Masta Killa only appeared on one track on the Wu-Tang Clan's first album, Enter the Wu-Tang (36 Chambers), in the closing verse to "Da Mystery of Chessboxin". Masta only narrowly made the track, and was almost left off in favor of Killah Priest. On the No Said Date DVD, Killah Priest claims that he and Masta Killa were in competition for the spot on "Da Mystery of Chessboxin'", and while Killah Priest fell asleep, Masta Killa stayed up all night writing and Killah Priest woke up the next morning to Masta Killa's verse. During the time period that Enter the Wu-Tang was being written, Masta Killa was still developing his skills as a rapper. Since the other members of Wu-Tang were far more experienced, his verse from "Da Mystery of Chessboxin", was the only thing Masta Killa had written, that was fine tuned to the point that it fit with the verses from the rest of the members.During the first round of solo projects, he made several appearances on Wu-Tang tracks, such as "Winter Warz", "Duel of the Iron Mic", and "Glaciers of Ice". His flow at the time attracted attention for being very slow and laid-back, in contrast to the more manic, forceful styles of members like Inspectah Deck and Ghostface Killah. Masta Killa is also the Clansman fondest of Chinese martial arts imagery. In 1997, the Wu-Tang Clan's second album Wu-Tang Forever saw Masta become a mainstay in the group's line-up with regular appearances throughout the double album.
Masta Killa was the last member to release a solo project, after it was delayed for several years and finally released in June 2004 with the title No Said Date; critically acclaimed, it became independent label Nature Sounds' best-selling album, notable for featuring every core member of the Wu-Tang Clan on the album after a period in the group's history that lacked unity. His second album, Made in Brooklyn, was released on August 8, 2006, and includes production from Pete Rock and MF Doom. "Ringing Bells", the Bronze Nazareth-produced lead single from the album, was released in March 2006.
In December 2012 he released his third album titled Selling My Soul, an LP with heavy soul grooves and guests including Kurupt and the late Ol' Dirty Bastard. The album was intended as a precursor to his long-awaited album Loyalty is Royalty, first announced in 2010 and eventually released in 2017.


== Personal life ==
On the Wu-Tang Corp. website, Masta Killa stated, "I know I seem serious and quiet to a lot of the fans. That's because I take my work seriously. It's not a game. The Clan and I work hard to give you the best." He is a fan of Gladys Knight, Patti LaBelle, Barry White, Parliament-Funkadelic and Ohio Players.Like fellow Wu-Tang Clan members GZA and RZA, Masta Killa is a vegetarian.Masta Killa is related to both Marvin Gaye and Nat Turner, as revealed in the 2019 Wu-Tang documentary Of Mics and Men. Masta Killa has two sons, Eternal and Jason.


== Moniker and aliases ==
Masta Killa gets his name from the 1978 kung fu movie Shaolin Master Killer, also known as the 36th Chamber of Shaolin. He is often referred to as Jamel Irief.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===
No Said Date (2004)
Made in Brooklyn (2006)
Selling My Soul (2012)
Loyalty is Royalty (2017)


== References ==


== External links ==

Masta Killa BiographyRonald Maurice Bean, better known professionally as Mathematics (also known as Allah Mathematics) (born October 21, 1971), is a hip hop producer and DJ for the Wu-Tang Clan and its solo and affiliate projects. He designed the Wu-Tang Clan logo.


== Biography ==
Born and raised in Jamaica, Queens, New York, Mathematics was introduced to hip hop by his brother who used to bring home recordings of the genre's pioneers like Grandmaster Flash & The Furious Five, Treacherous Three and Cold Crush Brothers. He began his career in 1987 DJing block parties and park jams in Baisley Projects, going by the name Supreme Cut Master. In 1988, he became the full-time DJ for experienced rapper Victor C, doing countless shows in clubs and colleges in New York City.
In 1990, Mathematics linked up with GZA/Genius, who would soon become one of the Wu-Tang Clan's founding members, but at the time was struggling to build a career on the Cold Chillin' label. This partnership earned Mathematics a spot on his first official tour, The Cold Chillin Blizzard Tour (with popular acts such as Biz Markie, Big Daddy Kane, Kool G. Rap & DJ Polo and Marley Marl).
GZA left Cold Chillin after his first album, Words from the Genius, did not achieve the sales target that was anticipated. He and Mathematics took to the road again, but this time with the help of GZA's cousins, RZA and Ol' Dirty Bastard. These three soon became the founding members of Wu-Tang Clan, then known as All In Together Now. The group soon dissolved, however, and the trio set their minds on creating the Wu group. During the group's inception, Mathematics used his experience as a graffiti artist to design a logo for the up-and-coming crew, as well as various other logos and designs the Wu-Tang's artists would use. In the years to come, he became a Wu-Element under the guidance of RZA.
Mathematics' first real exposure to production came late one night when he attended a session where he assisted RZA, his mentor, in constructing a beat from nothing. The track eventually developed into "Ice Cream" on Raekwon's Only Built 4 Cuban Linx album. RZA inspired Mathematics to follow the Wu-Tang, giving him advice on the nuances of hip hop production over the coming years. In 1996, Mathematics began record producing, in Staten Island, New York (Shaolin) and at home, in the P-Funk City, Plainfield, New Jersey, between heavily scheduled tour dates and rigorous road travelling with his father's gospel group, The Soul Seekers.
His first track, "Fast Life" featuring Ghostface Killah and the American football star Andre Rison, was included in the NFL Jams compilation album. Though this track faded into obscurity somewhat, it led to several more collaborations between Mathematics and Ghostface; Mathematics also began to produce for many other Wu-Tang members and affiliates, including several tracks on GZA's second album Beneath The Surface as well as Method Man's Tical 2000: Judgement Day, Inspectah Deck's Uncontrolled Substance and Method Man & Redman's Blackout!. Eventually, he produced for the Clan as a group, with "Do You Really (Thang, Thang)", "Careful (Click, Click)".
In 2003, Mathematics moved into TV work, as he produced the main theme and all original music for the short lived show Wanda At Large, which starred Wanda Sykes and was broadcast by the Fox Network. During this time and between continuous touring, Mathematics started work on his first solo full length project, Love, Hell Or Right. Completely mixed, arranged and produced by himself, Love Hell or Right was released fall 2003 on his own Quewisha Records label in conjunction with High Times Records, and it went on to sell 30,000 units.
As well as using rappers from Mathematics' home borough of Queens, Eyes-Low and Buddah Bless, Love Hell Or Right had appearances from all the Wu-Tang Clan members except GZA and the then-imprisoned Ol' Dirty Bastard. Mathematics soon signed to the popular independent hip hop label Nature Sounds (home to Wu-Tang colleague Masta Killa as well as MF DOOM) and released his second album The Problem in 2005. On this album the entire Wu-Tang Clan appeared, including a posthumous appearance from Ol' Dirty Bastard. As well as working on his solo albums, Mathematics has continued to contribute beats to many Wu-Tang releases, including the first albums by Masta Killa and Streetlife. In January 2012 he was to release a sequel to The Problem entitled The Answer, entirely produced by him with Wu-Tang members such as Raekwon, GZA, Method Man, Cappadonna, Masta Killa, Ol' Dirty Bastard, Ghostface Killah. Other artists include Redman and artists he is developing such as Ali Vegas, Eyeslow and Bad Luck.In August 2017, it was confirmed that Wu-Tang Clan will release a new album, Wu-Tang: The Saga Continues, which was entirely produced by Mathematics and was released on October 13, 2017. The first track off the album is titled "People Say" and features Redman.


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===


=== Production credits ===
America Is Dying Slowly - Red Hot AIDS Benefit Series, Red Hot Organization, Smoke One Productions
NFL Jams - "Fast Life"
Wu-Syndicate - "Pointin' Fingers", "Muzzle Toe"
Dirty Weaponry - "Galactics", "Bastard Swordsman"
Wu-Tang Killa Bees: The Swarm - "Cobra Clutch", "Punishment", "Fatal Sting"
The Pillage - "Oh Donna"
Tical 2000 Judgement Day - "Snuffed Out"
Beneath the Surface - "Amplified Sample", "High Price Small Reward", "Publicity", "Feel Like An Enemy", "Mic Trippin’"
Uncontrolled Substance - "Uncontrolled Substance"
Blackout! - "Dat's Dat Shit", "Fire Ina Hole"
The W - "Do You Really (Thang Thang)"
Supreme Clientele - "Mighty Healthy", "Wu-Banga 101"
Iron Flag - "Rules"
Digital Bullet - "Must Be Bobby", "Cousins"
Next Friday - "Shaolin Worldwide"
Bulletproof Wallets - "Theodore", "Strawberry"
 Legend of the Liquid Sword - "Fam (Members Only)"
Tera Iz Him - "Roll With The Rush"
Northstar - "Duckie", "We Got It"
No Said Date - "Last Drink", "Do That Dance", "Whatever"
Street Education - "FANZ", "Who Want To Rap?", "Sweetest Pain"
Wu-Tang Meets the Indie Culture - "Cars On the Interstate"
4:21...The Day After - "Dirty Mef", "Everything"
I - "Two Missed Calls"
8 Diagrams - "Stick Me for My Riches"
Pro Tools - "Pencil"
Blackout! 2 - "BO2 (Intro)"
Only Built 4 Cuban Linx... Pt. II - "Mean Streets"
Wu-Massacre - "Meth vs. Chef Part II", "Miranda", "Dangerous"
Heaven Razah - "Raised In Hell"
Shaolin vs. Wu-Tang - "Dart School"
Gold Cobra - "Middle Finger", "Combat Jazz"
Selling My Soul - "Intro", "Part 2", "All Natural" & "Wisdom"
The Saga Continues - entire album


== References ==


== External links ==
Mathematics on Myspace
Mathematics discographyIvan Matias is an American singer, songwriter, producer, arranger, hip hop ghostwriter, and entrepreneur. He is primarily known for writing and producing hit songs for artists like En Vogue ("Don't Let Go (Love)"), Angie Stone ("Wish I Didn't Miss You"), SWV ("You're The One"), and Blu Cantrell ("Breathe") among others which have sold over 44 million records worldwide and appear on over 100 greatest hits and compilation albums.Matias has also had four major label recording deals with Atlantic Records, London Records, Arista Records, and Elektra Entertainment. Only his Arista artist album was released and produced a #1 Dance Single "I've Had Enough".
Matias has been featured on several soundtracks including Dr. Dolittle ("Do Little Things"), Set It Off ("Set It Off"), The Mod Squad ("Messin' Around")  and Sprung ("Since You've Gone Away").


== Early career ==
Ivan began his career as a backing singer & dancer for many artists including Mariah Carey and Busta Rhymes. He went on from these humble beginnings to write and produce songs recorded by many of the industry's leading acts including Lauryn Hill, Jay-Z, Pink, Dr. Dre, Curtis Mayfield, Janet Jackson, Nelly, Lil' Kim, Timbaland, Swizz Beatz, Outkast, Queen Latifah, Toni Braxton, En Vogue, SWV, Angie Stone, Blu Cantrell, Sean Paul, Silk, Az Yet, Traci Spencer, Fatboy Slim, Chico Debarge, Ray J, Changing Faces, Tomcraft, Xscape,The Braxtons, Immature, City High, Another Level, Jody Watley, Eric Sermon and Bette Midler.Many of his songs have been featured worldwide on MTV, BET, VH1, NBC, FOX, ABC, CBS, BBC, ITV & performed on AMERICAN IDOL, THE X FACTOR (around the world), DANCING WITH THE STARS, THE VOICE, EMMY AWARDS, R&B DIVAS & SO YOU THINK YOU CAN DANCE and many other commercial placements.
Matias was signed to Warner/Chappell Music at the age of 19 making him one of the youngest and longest-running active writers in Warner's history. Matias has also had one of his songs appear on a newly released album for 18 consecutive years since his writing career began in 1995.
His career has included collaboration with top producers and writers including Dr.Dre, Timbaland, Swizz Beatz, Arif Mardin, Diane Warren, Wyclef Jean, Rodney Jerkins, Narada Michael Walden, Mervyn Warren, Just Blaze, Full Force, Frankie Knuckles, Randy Jackson, Rhett Lawrence, CJ Mackintosh and others. Many of Matias' hits were written with longtime songwriting partner Andrea Martin.


== Caushun The Gay Rapper ==
In 2000, Matias created a parody artist, Caushun, who received attention after he was announced as the first openly gay rapper to be signed to a major record label, including a New York Times cover & features in several publications, documentaries & television networks including Newsweek, Fox News, MTV, BET VH1 and recurring appearances on NY's HOT 97 and WBLS radio stations. Matias negotiated with hip hop mogul Russell Simmons to release an album of the parody rapper. Matias' creation has been credited with building the bridge between the LGBT community and the hip hop community as well as cultivating and drawing attention to the underground LGBT hip hop scene.


== Recent News ==
In December 2013 Matias' song "Don't Let Go (Love)" soared back to #1 & #3 simultaneously on the iTunes chart after Little Mix performed on The X Factor UK. Australian singer Greg Gould’s version of the track topped the charts globally in 2017 and the music video has had over 20 million views. Matias put Gould in touch with En Vogue’s Maxine Jones and the two re-recorded Gould’s arrangement of the song as a duet and then embarked on a tour together in late 2017. 


== References ==Rhonda Natasha Robinson (born March 6, 1974), better known by her stage name  Lady May, is an American rapper, singer, songwriter and model from Long Island, New York's suburbs.
May is African-American and partly of Asian descent. She grew up listening to Elton John, Duran Duran and Michael Jackson. At the age of fifteen, May stopped attending high school and became a hip hop dancer in music videos for artists such as LL Cool J and Jodeci, but was left unsatisfied, eventually turning to rap music. She danced with Big Lez and became and accountant for Trackmasters.She began rapping in the late 1990s under her stage name, Mae West; her rapping skills would eventually gain notice from fellow producer/rapper, Deric "D-Dot" Angelettie, who introduced her via his 2000 solo debut album, Tell 'Em Why U Madd, on the track "Shysty Broads" alongside former Timbaland protégé, Babe Blue. He later renamed her, Lady May, introduced her to Crazy Cat Productions and she eventually landed a contract deal with Arista Records in 2001.
May released her debut single in 2002, "Round Up", which featured R&B singer and former label-mate Blu Cantrell it had got slowly rotation on the radio and her and Cantrell performed it together on Soul Train. Her following planned single was "Dick & Doe"; a music video for the song was shot but in the midst of the pushbacks for May Day (first scheduled for a release in May 2002, then to July 16, 2002, then August 2002), the single and video as well as the album were altogether shelved after the poor reception gained from "Round Up" - the album eventually leaked onto P2P sites. She was also featured on former label-mate Rob Jackson's 2002 single "Boom Boom Boom", which was slated to appear on his debut album, For the People, but was eventually shelved as well. In 2003, she was featured on Willa Ford's "A Toast to Men", also appearing in its video.
The same year she appeared on DJ Kayslay's Streetsweeper Vol. 1 on the song "Seven Deadly Sins", which also featured Vita, Angie Martinez, Duchess, Amil, Sonja Blade, and Remy Ma.May contributed on Jennifer Lopez's 2007 Brave album credited as a songwriter on several tracks.May Day was ultimately released online on all platforms on August 30, 2023, nearly 21 years after it was ultimately shelved. It contains a few more interludes that were not present on the tracklist of the initial promotional copies that circulated physically.


== Discography ==


=== Singles ===


=== Album appearances ===


== Filmography ==


== References ==


== External links ==
VH1 Bio
MTV News: You Hear It First
Lady May at IMDbDarryl Matthews McDaniels (born May 31, 1964), better known by his stage name DMC, is an American rapper. He is a founding member of the hip hop group Run-DMC, and is considered one of the pioneers of hip hop culture.


== Early life ==
McDaniels grew up in Hollis, Queens, New York City, New York. He was born to an unwed mother who surrendered him to the New York Foundling home. He was a ward of the Foundling, in foster care, until placed with the McDaniels when he was one month old and eventually adopted by them. They raised him as a Catholic, and he attended St. Pascal Baylon Elementary School. He later attended Rice High School in Harlem, Manhattan, New York City. He subsequently attended St. John's University in Queens, New York City.McDaniels listened to rock music and folk music in his youth, and he first became interested in hip hop music in the 1970s after listening to recordings of Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five. In 1978, McDaniels taught himself to DJ in the basement of his parents' home, using turntables and a mixer that he bought with his older brother, Alford, after having a comic book sale in their neighborhood. During this period he adopted the stage name Grandmaster Get High.


== Career ==
Later that year, McDaniels sold his DJ equipment, after his friend Joseph "Run" Simmons acquired his own turntables and mixer. After Jam-Master Jay – who had a reputation as the best young DJ in Hollis – joined the group, Run encouraged McDaniels to rap rather than DJ. Gradually, McDaniels came to prefer rapping to mixing records, and adopted the nickname of "Easy D". In 1981, he dropped the "Easy D" moniker in favor of "DMcD", the way he signed his work in school, and then to the shorter "D.M.C.". This new nickname alternately stood for "Devastating Mic Control" or "Darryl Mac", his nickname since childhood as referenced in the lyrics of the song "King of Rock".
In 1984, the trio released their self-titled debut album and became very successful in the hip-hop industry. The group's success continued to grow and reached its peak with their third album Raising Hell. The album went to No. 6 on the Billboard 200 and No. 1 on the Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums chart, making Run-D.M.C. the most popular hip-hop group at the time. During this time, McDaniels began to build a reputation as a heavy drinker. He was known to drink up to eight 40-ounce bottles of malt liquor a day and was arrested twice for public intoxication and driving while intoxicated. In 1987 Run-D.M.C. wrote "Christmas in Hollis" for A Very Special Christmas. The music video for "Christmas in Hollis" was shot in Hollis, Queens. Run-D.M.C. filmed the video during their 1987 tour. DMC's mother made a guest appearance in the video.In 1997, McDaniels began to develop a deep depression. He became extremely unhappy with the rigorous routine of touring and performing, and with being away from his wife and newborn son. He began to rely heavily on prescription drugs and alcohol to ease the pain. While on tour, McDaniels noticed his voice was giving out. He was later diagnosed with spasmodic dysphonia, a vocal disorder which causes involuntary spasms of the larynx muscles. He believes it was caused by the aggressive way in which he performs his lyrics compounded with the years of heavy drinking.
Meanwhile, McDaniels began to have creative differences with his bandmates in Run-D.M.C., which by then, was well past its prime as a commercially successful hip-hop group. A longtime fan of artists such as The Beatles, Bob Dylan, and Harry Chapin, McDaniels wanted to move towards a slower, softer sound which suited his now troubled voice. Run wanted to continue with the aggressive, hard rock-edged, sound that the group was known for. These disagreements caused McDaniels to sit out most of the recording of Crown Royal (2001). He appeared on only three songs.
Feeling depressed and suicidal, McDaniels heard fellow adoptee Sarah McLachlan's song "Angel" (1997) on the radio. The song touched McDaniels so deeply that it inspired him to reassess his life and career. He credits McLachlan and her album Surfacing (on which "Angel" appeared) with saving his life. With a new outlook on life, McDaniels decided to write his autobiography. While researching his early years, his mother, Bannah, revealed a shocking secret: Darryl had been placed for adoption when he was three months old. According to Bannah, his birth mother was a woman of Dominican descent named Bernada Lovelace. He also learned that he was born in Harlem, Manhattan, not Hollis, Queens, as he had always believed. Even as a child, McDaniels knew he did not look like the rest of his family, and with the revelation, he finally understood why. The news inspired him to search for his birth mother. He began working with the VH1 network on a documentary chronicling his quest. His autobiography, King of Rock: Respect, Responsibility, and My Life with Run-DMC, was released in January 2001.In February 2006, VH1 premiered the documentary, DMC: My Adoption Journey. The program ends with McDaniels reuniting with his birth mother, who turned out to be named Berncenia and despite previous beliefs, was not, in fact, of Dominican descent. He thanks her for her choice because had he not been placed for adoption, Run-D.M.C. would have never existed. In March 2006, McDaniels released his solo album, Checks Thugs and Rock N Roll. Produced and Music Directed by Romeo Antonio. The first single, "Just Like Me", features an interpolation of Harry Chapin's "Cat's in the Cradle" (1974) performed by McDaniels' musical savior, Sarah McLachlan. During a recording session, McLachlan revealed to McDaniels that she, too, had been adopted.McDaniels also collaborated with Adoptee Zara Philips on "I'm Legit." He testified before the New Jersey State Legislature in support of legislation to restore adopted adults' access to their original birth certificates. The legislation McDaniels supported was signed by Governor Chris Christie and became effective on January 1, 2017. As a New York-born adoptee, however, McDaniels did not have access to his own original birth record; he  hired a private investigator to help find his birth family in New York.McDaniels had written the first draft of his autobiography before learning he was adopted and was working on a second solo album, working titled The Next Level. Three tracks off the new album have been released ("Next Level", "Hip Hop", and "Beef Eater") and can be heard on his Myspace page.In June 2007, McDaniels joined Aerosmith on stage at the Hard Rock Calling festival in London, England to perform "Walk This Way".McDaniels is featured in the video game Guitar Hero: Aerosmith (2008) singing Run-D.M.C.'s singles "King of Rock" and "Walk This Way". He is also an unlockable guitarist in the game. In the game's trailer, it is revealed that McDaniels' son plays Guitar Hero for hours each day.In 2009, McDaniels performed in The People Speak, a documentary feature film that uses dramatic and musical performances of the letters, diaries, and speeches of everyday Americans, based on historian Howard Zinn's nonfiction book A People's History of the United States (1980).McDaniels' second solo album, the more rock oriented The Origins Of Block Music, was due out in mid-2010 but was delayed. In December 2010, McDaniels appeared with Talib Kweli, Mix Master Mike, and Ahmet Zappa on a cover of Frank Zappa's "Willie the Pimp" for The Frank Zappa AAAFNRAAAA Birthday Bundle 2010.In 2011, McDaniels joined forces with producer Wade Martin to open the record label IME Records.
In 2014, McDaniels ventured into the comics industry with his own publishing imprint, Darryl Makes Comics. McDaniels explains his lifelong love of the medium thus:

Growing up a mild-mannered, Catholic school kid, all I did was go to school and read comic books. I was strictly a Marvel Comics head; Avengers, Iron Man, Captain America, The Hulk, Iron Fist, you name it. I loved Marvel because it was the city; it was all New York. The same backdrop I was living in in this universe was in the Marvel Universe. Comics did for me what hip hop did for me as I got older; it empowered me, inspired me and educated me. I learned about Nazis, space exploration, everything from comics.
Darryl Makes Comics' first book is DMC, a 90-page anthology graphic novel set in 1985 that features McDaniels as a superhero who confronts both criminals and other superheroes whose recklessness threatens innocent lives. The comic's version of DMC wears McDaniels' signature Adidas sneakers, fedora and rope chain, along with an elongated turtleneck that masks his face. The book is written by McDaniels and Damion Scott, and edited by Darryl Makes Comics' Editor-in-Chief, Edgardo Miranda-Rodriguez and Senior Editor Rigo "Riggs" Morales. Each chapter in the anthology is illustrated by a different artist, because, as McDaniels explained, "If DMC was really running around and bumped into four different people, they'd have four different descriptions of what he was like. We wanted each artist's work to relate to each character's view of DMC. If you saw him, you might say, "He came out of a spaceship and had all these things flying around him!" But then another dude is like, "No! He had a sword and shield!" We thought, if so many people saw something different in DMC, we'd have to have different artwork to represent their opinions on him or their interpretation on him." In addition, graffiti writers such as MARE 139 were hired to give the shots of 1985 New York City graffiti a sense of authenticity. The book features an introduction by Greg Pak, a cover by Sal Buscema and Bob Wiacek and interior pinups by Carlos Pacheco, Chris Burnham, ChrisCross, Dexter Vines, and Shelby Robertson, some of which are homages to iconic comics covers that influenced the creative staff as children. DMC debuted at the New York Comic Con October 9–12, and was subsequently released in comics shops October 29. The book received a four out of five stars rating by Tony Guerrero of Comic Vine, who lauded the charm and authenticity of the art.As of January 2015, McDaniels was working with the band Generation Kill on a project, DMC Generation Kill, to be produced by former Guns N' Roses guitarist Ron "Bumblefoot" Thal.On the December 17, 2016 Christmas episode of Saturday Night Live, DMC made a cameo appearance during a parody of Run DMC's "Christmas in Hollis." During the sketch he was portrayed by musical guest Chance the Rapper.On February 17, 2016, heavy metal band Solus Deus released their EP titled The Plague. The song titled "Anacrime" features DMC on guest vocals.
Starting in 2017 and continuing on an ongoing basis, DMC has joined the rock cover supergroup Royal Machines as a guest at their occasional concerts. Joining a revolving cast of celebrities in each lineup, including Dave Navarro, Billy Morrison, Sebastian Bach, Macy Gray, Fred Durst, DMC has performed covers of songs such as "Walk This Way", "Sweet Emotion", and "Black Betty" with the band.
On September 15, 2017, Italian rapper Caparezza released his studio album, Prisoner 709, which includes the track "Forever Jung" that features DMC on guest vocals. American rapper DeLiverance's 2018 single "Slave To The Rhythm" also features DMC on guest vocals.
On August 13, 2018, DMC performed an encore with O.A.R., playing "Walk This Way".In February 2021, McDaniels released a song and animated video, "Let's All Get the Vaccine," to encourage the COVID-19 vaccination.In January 2022, McDaniels released his picture book, Darryl's Dream, published by Random House.


== Charity work ==
The Felix Organization
In 2006, McDaniels and Sheila Jaffe, a fellow adoptee and Emmy award-winning casting director, co-founded The Felix Organization.
Since its inception, The Felix Organization has served more than 10,000 children in the foster care system. Its flagship program, Camp Felix, is an annual sleepaway summer camp in Putnam Valley, New York. Additionally, The Felix Organization sponsors two teen camps on the East Coast. Camp Felix West is for Los Angeles-based youth in foster care.
Other charity work
In September 2006, McDaniels received the Congressional Angels in Adoption award for his work with children in foster care and promotion of adoption. He sits on the Board of Directors of Children's Rights, a national watchdog organization that reforms failing child welfare systems.


== Personal life ==
McDaniels has been a resident of Wayne, New Jersey.McDaniels has openly discussed his history of alcoholism and drug abuse. He has been very frank about his battles with depression, including an appearance on Live From the Barrage, speaking at length about it. He also has written pieces in Men's Health and BlackDoctor, where he talked about his memoir, Ten Ways Not to Commit Suicide (Amistad, 2017).


== Discography ==
With Run-D.M.C.

Run-D.M.C. (1984)
King of Rock (1985)
Raising Hell (1986)
Tougher Than Leather (1988)
Back from Hell (1990)
Down with the King (1993)
Crown Royal (2001)Solo

Checks Thugs and Rock n Roll (2006)
Back from the Dead EP  (2017)With Fragile Mortals

The Dark Project (2016)


== Filmography ==


== Video game appearances ==
The Warriors – Scopes
Guitar Hero: Aerosmith – Himself


== References ==


== External links ==

The People Speak at IMDb
Darryl McDaniels discography at Discogs 
Darryl McDaniels discography at MusicBrainz
"An Interview with DMC of Run DMC". Brooklyn Vegan. December 12, 2006
Diamond, Jay (June 26, 2008). "DMC". BritishHipHop.co.uk.
McNamara, Mary (December 12, 2009). "'The People Speak'". Los Angeles TimesHerbert Malburn Brown (born March 20, 1973) better known by his stage name McGruff (also known as Herb McGruff) is an American hip hop recording artist from Harlem, New York, perhaps best known for being a member of Children of the Corn alongside Big L, Cam'ron, Bloodshed, and Mase.


== Career ==
Brown started rapping in his early teens. He embarked on his music career in the hip hop group Bronx Most Wanted, alongside rappers Jay Q and Tee U.B. Brown later became a member of the hip hop collective Children of the Corn. As a member of Children of the Corn, Brown worked alongside Big L, Cam'ron, Bloodshed and Mase, all of whom would go on to have successful careers in the music industry. After the group disbanded without releasing any material, Brown made his first appearance on Big L's debut album, Lifestylez ov da Poor & Dangerous (1995), on the tracks "8 Iz Enuff" and "Danger Zone". Eventually, Brown signed a deal with popular hip hop label, Uptown Records and began recording his debut album, Destined to Be. In early 1998, the album's lead single "Before We Start" became a minor hit, charting on several Billboard charts. In the Summer of 1998, Destined to Be was released but failed to sell many copies, only peaking at 169 on the Billboard 200, and Brown was released from his contract. Brown would make appearances with Heavy D on his album, Waterbed Hev and the Woo soundtrack. 
McGruff contributed guest vocals on the song Stop Calling on Cam'ron's Platinum-RIAA certified album, Come Home With Me, which sold over a million copies in America. In 2009, Brown appeared on Mase's mixtape I Do the Impossible. In 2010, he was featured heavily on The Diplomats mixtape, The D.I.P. Agenda. In 2014, DJ Kay Slay, enlisted Brown, along with Raekwon, Fat Joe, Ghostface Killah, Sheek Louch, N.O.R.E., Lil' Fame, Prodigy and Rell, for a song titled "90s Flow". In 2020, Brown featured on the single "City In The Sky" by independent artist Rayne Storm, along with fellow Harlemite Stan Spit and singer/songwriter Phoenixx.


== Legal issues ==
in May 16, 2008, McGruff was arrested in Yonkers, New York, and charged with second degree criminal possession of controlled substance. Police reportedly recovered a cannabis on his person.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===


== References ==Dorsey Wesley, better known by his stage name Megahertz, is an American record producer, composer and songwriter.
Vibe Magazine dubbed Megahertz one of music's "10 Most Valuable Producers", while About.com ranked him on its list of the "Top 50 Greatest Hip-Hop Producers".Described by Billboard Magazine as a "Powerful Producer", Megahertz has enjoyed commercial success producing music for television, film, video games, mixtapes & songs that have been certified gold, platinum and multiplatinum.
Associated with artists such as P. Diddy, Snoop Dogg, Jay-Z, 50 Cent, R. Kelly, Busta Rhymes, Nas & Saturday Night Live's Robert Smigel – it has been said that Megahertz "..brings the wattage."


== Early career ==
Megahertz is a native of Willingboro, New Jersey. He was raised in a "Christian household that didn't allow rap music." Trying to keep his passion hidden, he would get "extra church time" if his mom heard him rapping. Despite his rigid religious upbringing, Megahertz immersed himself in what his mother called "evil music".But as Megahertz admitted to Billboard Magazine, "Not being able to listen to music only made me want to hear it more." Tired of rapping over other people's beats, Megahertz began to purchase his own equipment and secretly keep it at his friend's house. Before long, producing music took precedence over rapping.One of his first breakthrough hits was "Bad Boy for Life". According to Vibe Magazine, "...Megahertz's bionic rubber-band beat for 'Bad Boy for Life' put Diddy back in the winner's circle." Grammy nominated and certified four times platinum, it was the second single from P. Diddy's The Saga Continues, which peaked at number two on the US Billboard Mainstream Top 40. The "Bad Boy for Life" music video featured cameo's by actor Ben Stiller, rock drummer Travis Barker, NBA star Shaquille O'Neal and others.


== Commercial success ==
Described by Billboard Magazine as a "powerful producer", Megahertz has enjoyed commercial success producing music for television, film, video games, mixtapes & songs that have been certified gold, platinum and multiplatinum.
Associated with artists such as P. Diddy, Snoop Dogg, Jay-Z, 50 Cent, R. Kelly, Busta Rhymes, Nas & Saturday Night Live's Robert Smigel – it has been said that Megahertz "..brings the wattage."Megahertz made history when he produced "Gotta Make It to Heaven" for the fourth highest selling U.S. rap album of all-time, 50 Cent's Get Rich or Die Tryin'. With over 12 million copies sold, it is on one of the best selling albums of the decade.


== Production style ==
Music writer Raqiyah Mays wrote, "There's power in Megahertz's name: a million cycles per second, to be exact. And when you buy his beats it's as if that power electrocutes whomever he's working with, shocking them into accelerating their skills."
Megahertz's genre-bending production style uses original composition, in combination with the occasional use of sampled sounds or songs, performed over programmed drums.
One such track was the Nas single "Got Ur Self a Gun", which used "Woke Up This Morning" – the theme song from HBO's The Sopranos. Referencing the music Megahertz created around that sample, MTV's Shaheed Reid wrote, "Megahertz molded pianos and strings that sound like they could've been played at the coronation ceremony for an 18th century king."Another example of his knack for reinterpreting popular music occurred when Megahertz created a track for Tony Yayo's debut album using a sample made popular by Britney Spears. In the words of one fan, "'Love My Style' is probably one of the album's craziest tracks as Megahertz flips the same sample used on Britney Spears's 'Toxic.' What was once sugar-sweet pop takes on a menacing and minister tone and Yayo takes full advantage as he attacks the beat with confidence."Megahertz's diverse production style, opened the door for collaborations with rock groups like P.O.D. & Linkin Park. Attracted to unusual musical pairings, Megahertz told Source Magazine, "I like System of a Down and I wouldn't mind doing something with them....I'd work with Limp Bizkit and I'm a Björk fan. I'll do Calypso. I'll do some Indian music, whatever, just bring it on. I'll do it."
Resolute that his music continue to evolve, Megahertz said, "I'm not into repeat joints- I want to be re-discovered for new sounds each time."


== Performer ==
As a performer Megahertz grew up rapping, a talent that blossomed into creating jingles, commercial spots and ultimately led to songwriting & singing. In one such performance, Megahertz drops a cameo on the chorus of "Superstar", a song that features Ice Cube, WC & Mack 10.


== Controversy ==
One of the most high-profile feuds in American hip hop history was the rivalry between Jay-Z & Nas. Vibe Magazine writer Dave Tompkins recounts, "When Jigga's (a.k.a. Jay-Z's) publicized beef with Nas reached nasty proportions, everyone waited on a response from God's Son (a.k.a. Nas). And he came out swinging with the Megahertz produced "Got Ur Self A Gun" – a killer cut laced with a violent harpsichord."The track was the second single on Nas' Stillmatic album, and just days after its release, Jay-Z retaliated by putting out "Supa Ugly", a combative freestyle, performed over "Got Ur Self A Gun" and Dr. Dre's song "Bad Intentions."


== Later years ==
At the height of his production career, he suddenly disappeared from the music industry. According to Megahertz, the reason was due to the death of his father around the time of his success.


== Awards and nominations ==
MTV Awards
Best Rap Video "Bad Boy For Life" [Nominated]
MVPA Awards
Best Rap Video "Bad Boy For Life" [Nominated]
Grammy Awards
Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group "Bad Boy For Life" [Nominated]
Soul Train Music Awards
R&B/Soul Album Group, Band or Duo "The Best of Both Worlds' " [Nominated]
American Music Awards
Favorite Rap/Hip-Hop Album "Get Rich or Die Tryin' " [Won]
Billboard Music Awards
Album of the Year "Get Rich or Die Tryin' " [Won]
Billboard R&B/Hip-Hop Awards
Top R&B/Hip-Hop Album "Get Rich or Die Tryin'	" [Won]
Billboard R&B/Hip-Hop Awards
Top Rap Album "Get Rich or Die Tryin' " [Won]
MOBO Awards
Best Album "Get Rich or Die Tryin' " [Won]
The Source Awards
Album of the Year "Get Rich or Die Tryin' " [Won]
Vibe Awards
Dopest Album "Get Rich or Die Tryin' " [Won]


== References ==


== External links ==

Megahertz discography at Discogs
Megahertz Thir13en Ghosts Soundtrack on IMDb
Megahertz Lakeview Terrace Soundtrack on IMDb
Megahertz Death of a Dynasty Soundtrack on New York Times
Megahertz Death on Barnes & Noble Barnes & NobleMelvin Glover (born May 15, 1961), better known by his stage name Grandmaster Melle Mel or simply Melle Mel (), is an American rapper who was the lead vocalist and songwriter of Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five.


== Career ==
Glover began performing in the late 1970s. He may have been the first rapper to call himself MC (master of ceremonies). Other Furious Five members included his brother The Kidd Creole (Nathaniel Glover), Scorpio (Eddie Morris), Rahiem (Guy Todd Williams) and Cowboy (Keith Wiggins). While a member of the group, Cowboy created the term hip-hop while teasing a friend who had just joined the US Army, by scat singing the words "hip/hop/hip/hop" in a way that mimicked the rhythmic cadence of marching soldiers.Grandmaster Flash & The Furious Five began recording for Enjoy Records and released "Superrappin'" in 1979. They later moved on to Sugar Hill Records and were popular on the R&B charts with party songs like "Freedom" and "The Birthday Party". They released numerous singles, gaining a gold disc for "Freedom", and touring. In 1982 Melle Mel began to turn to more socially-aware subject matter, in particular the Reagan administration's economic (Reaganomics) and drug policies, and their effect on the black community.
A song "The Message" became an instant classic and one of the first examples of conscious hip-hop by exploring personal and social themes. Mel recorded a rap over session musician Duke Bootee's instrumental track "The Jungle". Some of Mel's lyrics on "The Message" were taken directly from "Superrappin'". Other than Melle Mel, no members of Grandmaster Flash & The Furious Five actually appear on the record. Bootee also contributed vocals (Rahiem was to later lip sync Bootee's parts in the music video).
"The Message" would later be the first hip-hop record ever to be added to the United States National Archive of Historic Recordings and the first hip hop record inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame. Mel would also go on to write songs about struggling life in New York City ("New York, New York"), and making it through life in general ("Survival (The Message 2)"). Grandmaster Flash split from the group after contract disputes between Melle Mel and their promoter Sylvia Robinson in regard to royalties for "The Message". When Flash filed a lawsuit against Sugar Hill Records, the factions of The Furious Five parted.Mel became known as Grandmaster Melle Mel and the leader of the Furious Five. The group went on to produce the anti-drug song "White Lines (Don't Don't Do It)". An unofficial music video starred up-and-coming actor Laurence Fishburne and was directed by then-unknown film student Spike Lee. The record was falsely credited to "Grandmaster + Melle Mel" by Sugar Hill Records, in order to fool the public into thinking Grandmaster Flash had participated on the record.
Mel gained greater fame and success after appearing in the movie Beat Street, with a song based on the movie's title. He performed a memorable rap on Chaka Khan's smash hit song "I Feel for You", which introduced hip hop to a wider and more mainstream R&B audience. Grandmaster Melle Mel & The Furious Five had further hits with "Step Off", "Pump Me Up", "King of the Streets", "Jesse", and "Vice", the latter being released on the soundtrack to the TV show Miami Vice. "Jesse" was a highly political song which urged people to vote for then presidential candidate Jesse Jackson.
In 1988, after an almost four-year layoff, Mel and Flash reunited and released the album On The Strength, but with up-and-coming new school artists such as Eric B. & Rakim, DJ Jazzy Jeff & The Fresh Prince, Public Enemy, Boogie Down Productions, and Big Daddy Kane dominating the hip-hop market, the album failed miserably. Mel performed with The King Dream Chorus and Holiday Crew on "King Holiday" aimed at having Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.'s birthday declared a national holiday. Mel also performed with Artists United Against Apartheid on the anti-apartheid song "Sun City" which was aimed at discouraging other artists from performing in South Africa until its government ended its policy of apartheid. Mel ended the decade by winning two Grammy Awards for his work on Quincy Jones' Back On The Block and Q – The Autobiography of Quincy Jones albums.
In 1995, Duran Duran did a cover version of "White Lines" featuring performances from Grandmaster Flash and Melle Mel and released it as the second single from the Duran Duran cover album Thank You.
In 1996, Mel contributed vocals to the US edition of Cher's hit "One By One". Their version is only available on the maxi CD format.
In 1997, Melle Mel signed to Straight Game Records and released Right Now, an album which features Scorpio (from the Furious Five) and Rondo. This album took more of a harder rap style. It barely sold at all in the US and the UK.
In 2001, under the name Die Hard, he released the song "On Lock" with Rondo on the soundtrack of the movie Blazin. Die Hard released an album of the same name in 2002 on 7PRecords.
On November 14, 2006, Mel collaborated with author Cricket Casey and released the children's book The Portal In The Park, which comes with a bonus CD of his rapped narration. It also features two songs, "World Family Tree" and "The Fountain of Truth", by a then unknown Lady Gaga performing with Mel. The book was re-released in 2010. Also in 2006, Melle Mel attended professional wrestling school. In 2007 (at age 45), he stated in an interview with allhiphop.com that "I'm going to try to take some of John Cena's money and get with WWE and do my thing".
On January 30, 2007, Mel released his first ever solo album, Muscles. The first single and music video was "M3 – The New Message". On March 12, 2007, Melle Mel and The Furious Five (joined by DJ Grandmaster Flash) became the first rap group ever inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. In his acceptance speech, Mel implored the recording industry members in attendance to do more to restore hip hop to the culture of music and art that it once was, rather than the culture of violence that it has become. He added, "I've never been shot, I've never been arrested, and I've been doing hip hop all my life. I can't change things all by myself. We need everybody's help, so let's do it and get this thing done."
On October 10, 2008, Mel appeared on Bronx-based culinary adventure show Bronx Flavor alongside host Baron Ambrosia. In the episode "Night at the Bodega", he appears as a spiritual mentor to sway the Baron from his over-indulgent ways and get him on the right path to success.
In April 2011, it was revealed that he would take part in a new hip hop/pro wrestling collaboration, the Urban Wrestling Federation. Its first bout "First Blood" was recorded in June 2011.
Mel also appeared in Ice-T's 2012 hip hop documentary Something from Nothing: The Art of Rap.
In August 2015, Mel appeared with Kool Moe Dee and Grandmaster Caz in Macklemore and Ryan Lewis's song and music video "Downtown".
In May 2016, Mel and Scorpio, performing as Grandmaster's Furious Five ft. Melle Mel & Scorpio, released their single "Some Kind of Sorry".


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===


=== Group albums ===


=== Collaborative albums ===


=== Compilations ===


=== Singles ===
1979 "We Rap More Mellow" (as The Younger Generation)
1979 "Flash to the Beat" (as Flash and the Furious 5)
1979 "Superrappin'" (as Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five)
1980 "Freedom" (as Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five)
1980 "The Birthday Party" (as Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five)
1981 "Showdown" (as The Furious Five Meets The Sugarhill Gang)
1981 "It's Nasty (Genius of Love)" (as Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five)
1981 "Scorpio" (as Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five)
1981 "The Adventures of Grandmaster Flash on the Wheels of Steel" (as Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five)
1982 "The Message" (as Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five)
1982 "Message II (Survival)" (as Melle Mel & Duke Bootee)
1983 "New York New York" (as Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five)
1983 "White Lines (Don't Don't Do It)" (as Grandmaster & Melle Mel / Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five / Grandmaster Flash and Melle Mel)
1984 "Continuous White Lines" (Remix – as Grandmaster Melle Mel and the Furious Five)
1984 "Jesse" (as Grandmaster Melle Mel)
1984 "Beat Street Breakdown" a.k.a. "Beat Street" (as Grandmaster Melle Mel and the Furious Five)
1984 "Step Off" (as Grandmaster Melle Mel and the Furious Five)
1984 "We Don't Work for Free" (as Grandmaster Melle Mel and the Furious Five)
1984 "World War III" (as Grandmaster Melle Mel and the Furious Five / Grandmaster Melle Mel)
1985 "King Of the Streets" (as Grandmaster Melle Mel)
1985 "Pump Me Up" (as Grandmaster Melle Mel and the Furious Five)
1985 "Vice" (as Grandmaster Melle Mel)
1985 "The Mega-Melle Mix" (as Melle Mel)
1988 "Gold" (as Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five)
1988 "Magic Carpet Ride" (as Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five)
1994 "Sun Don't Shine in the Hood" (Split 12" single with "Da Original" as The Furious Five)
1995 "The Message 95" (Remix – as Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five
1997 "The Message" (Remix – as Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five)
1997 "Mama" (as Grandmaster Mele-Mel & Scorpio)
1997 "Mr. Big Stuff" (as Grandmaster Mele-Mel & Scorpio)
2003 "Where Ya At?" (as Melle Mel)
2007 "M-3" (as Grandmaster Mele Mel)
2011 "Markus Schulz Presents Dakota feat. Grandmaster Mele Mel & Scorpio" – Sleepwalkers
2014 "Don't Shoot" (as Grandmaster Melle Mel)
2016 "Some Kind of Sorry" (as Grandmaster's Furious Five Ft. Mele Mel & Scorpio)


=== Collaborations ===
1984 "I Feel for You" by Chaka Khan
1986 "MC Story" by MC Chill and Emanon (The Baby Beatbox)
1986 "Susie" by Emanon
1986/87 "Who Do You Think You're Funkin' With" — collaborating with Afrika Bambaataa1988 “R U Tuff Enuff” remix by Rebbie Jackson1989 "What's the Matter with Your World?" (with Van Silk)1995 "White Lines (Don't Don't Do It)" by Duran Duran
1996 "What Order" (with Keith LeBlanc)
2005 "RSVP" (with Nikkole)
2008 "Hip Hop Fantasy" by Chutzpah – for the track Bizness.
2009 "Electro Soul Satisfaction" — collaborating with Mic Murphy of The System


== Awards and nominations ==


== References ==


== External links ==
https://www.bet.com/article/6av308/melle-mel-apologizes-eminem-diss-track
Biography at hiphop.sh
"Melle Mel Stands by 'The Message'". Fresh Air. National Public Radio; re-broadcast and republished from August 4, 1992. March 2, 2007. Archived from the original on May 4, 2007. Retrieved October 11, 2016.
Grandmaster Melle Mel discography at DiscogsClifford Smith, Jr. (born March 2, 1971), better known by his stage name Method Man, is an American rapper, record producer, and actor. He is a member of the East Coast hip hop collective Wu-Tang Clan, and is half of the hip hop duo Method Man & Redman. He took his stage name from the 1979 film Method Man. In 1996, Method Man won a Grammy Award for Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group for "I'll Be There for You/You're All I Need to Get By", featuring R&B singer Mary J. Blige, with whom he currently stars in Power Book II: Ghost, a spin-off of Power.
Method Man has appeared in films such as 187 (1997),  Belly (1998), How High (2001), Garden State (2004), The Wackness (2008), Venom (2005), Red Tails (2012),  Keanu (2016), and The Cobbler (2014). He and frequent collaborator rapper Redman co-starred on the short-lived Fox television sitcom Method & Red. He has also had recurring roles in three HBO series, as Tug Daniels in Oz, Melvin "Cheese" Wagstaff in The Wire, and Rodney in The Deuce. Method Man also appeared in the TBS comedy series The Last O.G..


== Early life ==
Born on March 2, 1971, in Hempstead, Long Island, Smith divided his childhood between his father's Long Island residence and his mother's home in the Park Hill section of Clifton, Staten Island, locally known as Killa Hill. Growing up in Hempstead, Smith began playing lacrosse at a young age and continues to be a passionate supporter of the sport. He attended New Dorp High School, where he became friends with Remedy. He has two sisters, Terri and Missy.


== Music career ==


=== 1992–1996: Enter the Wu-Tang (36 Chambers) and Tical ===
As Wu-Tang Clan ascended to hip hop stardom, Method Man was always one of the most visible members of the collective. He was one of only two members to get a solo song on the group's debut album Enter the Wu-Tang (36 Chambers) and he was the first to release a solo album under the Clan's unusual contract which allowed its members to release albums under any record label. Method Man chose to sign with rap label Def Jam Recordings, although Elektra Records A&R man Dante Ross initially wanted to sign him around the same time Ross signed fellow group member Ol' Dirty Bastard. Method Man's solo debut, Tical (1994), was critically acclaimed and well received, entering the American charts at #4 and eventually selling in excess of one million copies. That album featured the hit single "All I Need", later remixed featuring Mary J. Blige, which won a Grammy ("I'll Be There for You/You're All I Need"). During this time Method Man also became close friends with fellow New York City-based rapper The Notorious B.I.G., and was the only guest rapper featured on his debut album Ready to Die. He was also featured on Spice 1's album AmeriKKKa's Nightmare on the track "Hard 2 Kill". In 1995, he was also featured on "Got the Flava" off Showbiz and A.G.'s album Goodfellas. He also appeared on the Batman Forever soundtrack. His track, The Riddler, produced by RZA included a video with clips from the film. In 1996, Method Man appeared on Tupac Shakur's album All Eyez on Me, on the song "Got My Mind Made Up" alongside his rhyme partner Redman, the Dogg Pound (Daz and Kurupt) and Inspectah Deck, whose verse did not make the released album version (although his nickname "Rebel INS" can be heard as the song fades). He was also featured on Redman's 1996 album Muddy Waters on the track "Do What Ya Feel".


=== 1997–1998: Wu-Tang Forever and Tical 2000: Judgment Day ===
On June 3, 1997, the Wu-Tang Clan released their Grammy-nominated multiplatinum double CD Wu-Tang Forever, the long-awaited follow up to 36 Chambers. The album has sold over 2 million copies to date worldwide.
In 1996, the movie, Space Jam was released. Method Man, alongside LL Cool J, Busta Rhymes, B-Real and Coolio released a song from the Space Jam Soundtrack called, Hit 'em High. Method Man would go on to feature on LL Cool J's, 4,3,2,1 the following year.
His second solo album was Tical 2000: Judgement Day, released in 1998, which was heavily influenced by the apocalypse theories surrounding the forthcoming end of the millennium, and which featured myriad guest appearances from his fellow Wu-Tang MCs. The album was certified double platinum. Other guest appearances include Lisa "Left Eye" Lopes, D'Angelo, Chris Rock, Mobb Deep, Redman, and brief cameos from Russell Simmons, Bishop Don "Magic" Juan, Janet Jackson, and Donald Trump. The album sold better than his first fueled by the party track "Judgment Day" and the D'Angelo collaboration "Break Ups 2 Make Ups", earning Platinum and Gold certifications in the U.S. and Canada respectively. Reviews for the album were mixed and its long runtime and abundance of intermittent comedy skits were widely criticized. Producers on this album included True Master, 4th Disciple and the RZA.
In 1997, Scottish rock band, Texas, had found some success with their single, "Say What You Want". In 1998, the band collaborated with Method Man and RZA on a remix of the song titled "Say What You Want (All Day, Every Day)", with RZA producing. It was later included in the Greatest Hits album released by Texas.


=== 1999–2001: Blackout! (with Redman) and WWF Aggression ===
Method Man was part of the very successful Hard Knock Life Tour with Jay-Z, Redman, Ja Rule, and DMX. During this tour, Method Man & Redman recorded Blackout!, a light-hearted, bass-heavy, profanity-laced, party record with an EPMD-evoking emphasis on funky beats and the mischievous wit and cool flows and good rhythm of the two MCs. The album reached platinum status quickly, both in the U.S. and Canada, fueled by "Da Rockwilder", "Cereal Killa", "1, 2, 1, 2", "Tear It Off" and "Y.O.U." This album also featured three previously released tracks on which the two collaborated.
Their success would lead the duo on to star in movies and TV shows, become product spokespersons and household names, but also associated them with marijuana use in the media. The most immediate results of their success was their co-starring roles in the major motion picture film How High, their endorsement deal for Right Guard, Redman's starring role in Seed of Chucky and a short-lived sitcom on Fox Television entitled Method & Red.
In 1999, Method Man featured on Limp Bizkit's song "N 2 Gether Now" from their album Significant Other.
In 2000, Method Man performed Know Your Role which was included on the album titled, WWF Aggression. The song is focused on the popularity of professional wrestler at the time Dwayne Johnson whose wrestling name was 'The Rock' and the main line in the song is The Rock's most famous caption "Do you smell what The Rock is cookin'?".


=== 2001–2004: The W, Iron Flag, and Tical 0: The Prequel ===
The Wu-Tang Clan released The W on November 21, 2000, and Iron Flag on December 18, 2001. The W received both critical and commercial success for the group, while Iron Flag did receive some but not to the effect of The W. The efforts earned two more platinum plaques for the Wu-Tang Clan.
In 2003, Method Man criticized Oli "Power" Grant and Mitchell "Divine" Diggs, the managers of the Wu-Tang Clan business. "Number 1 on my shit list right now is Divine from Wu-Tang management.  He took something major from me that he had no intention of giving back."Aside from the financial issues, Method Man was unhappy with the decision to bring Wu-Tang into the fashion world for a brief period of time with Wu-Wear, despite the brand being a major money-maker for the group. "When Wu-Wear started making shoes and sneakers and pants, it was shoddy material. I never rocked that shit."In 2004, Meth released his third solo album Tical 0: The Prequel, which featured the hit party single "What's Happenin'" with Busta Rhymes and included guest appearances of pop-rap stars like Missy Elliott and P. Diddy. The album sold well and was certified gold record by the RIAA but did not see the platinum success of his previous solo releases.P. Diddy was one of the executive producers for the album, although Meth later voiced his displeasure with the final product. "On the third LP, it was suggested (by Def Jam) to bring in Harve Pierre and P. Diddy. Who am I to argue? Puff knows how to sell some records. But that wasn't the direction to go in, and I know that."


=== 2006–2007: 4:21... The Day After ===
Method Man's fourth album, entitled 4:21: The Day After was released in August 2006 with a star lineup of producers featuring Havoc, Erick Sermon, Scott Storch, Allah Mathematics, Mr. Porter, and, most importantly to Meth, RZA. This time around, a more focused Method Man went back to his hip hop roots and both hip hop fans and the media took notice. He did an interview on the ItsHipHop.Tv. Despite this being one of Meth's strongest solo efforts to date, the album failed to do well commercially due to it having no single or video, which Method Man has held discontent towards his own label for. However, he toured strongly all over the world to promote the album, and appeared onstage with fellow Wu-Tang member Inspectah Deck, as well as New York up and comers Saigon, and Gat Murdah. Meth cited various reasons for the problems between him and his label, Def Jam. While he puts most of the blame on personal agendas in the Def Jam offices, Meth did take some blame, himself, for giving in to his record label.
In early May 2007, Method Man's camp leaked the street single "New York New York" which became a popular track on the internet.


=== 2007–2010: Blackout! 2 ===
On March 27, 2007, Redman confirmed on BET's Rap City: Tha Bassment that a sequel to How High is currently being written.
In an April 10, 2007, Onion A.V. Club interview,  Redman hinted that there would be a second collaborative album with Method Man, with work beginning in midsummer or early September.
In early 2008, a remake of the Smooth da Hustler and Trigger tha Gambler classic Broken Language was released to the internet by the duo entitled Broken Language 2008, fueling rumors of a Blackout! sequel coming soon. This rumor was further fueled by the duo while performing in Gainesville, Florida at the University of Florida. Blackout! 2 was scheduled for a December 9, 2008, release but was pushed back to the first quarter of 2009, with a new release date of May 19, 2009. Bun B confirmed that he guest starred on Blackout! 2 – in April 2009, a single was released titled "City Lights", produced by Nasty Kutt Producers such as Erick Sermon, Rockwilder and Pete Rock also announced their presence on the album.
The duo has finished their Still High tour with Termanalogy, the Alchemist, and Evidence of Dilated Peoples.


=== 2011–present: The Meth Lab and Crystal Meth ===
Crystal Meth is to be Method Man's upcoming fifth and final studio album. The album has no confirmed release date. The Crystal Meth album was first announced before Method Man began working on his and Redman's second collaboration album, Blackout! 2, during which time it was tentatively titled The Crystal Method. In the liner notes of that album, it was given a scheduled release date for 2009. The album, however, was further postponed until it was later mentioned in an MTV interview it would be released in early 2010. At a concert on December 23, 2010, Method Man told the crowd to look for his album in March 2011. However, the album was postponed again.
In an April 2011 interview with The Come Up Show, following a recent performance in Canada, Method Man replied to a question regarding his "weed-loving" image: "When you get older and you've got kids and your kids are going to school and you know [their] teachers...and they see how active you are and concerned [you are] with your kids' education or well being, it's hard to sit there and be taken seriously if people are always talking about he's always high...which is totally not the case", he said. "When I first came out, I was young, we were doing our thing, we smoked a lot...and we didn't care if the world knew. Now, I have to use more discretion because of my kids. This is not for me; everything I do is for them now, so I use a bit more discretion and I don't put weed as a forefront any more."On October 5, 2011, a new single from Method Man, entitled "World Gone Sour (The Lost Kids)", was released on iTunes. In July 2012, he confirmed that the album will come out in 2013 & will be produced by RZA, although he has also stated that RZA would not entirely produce the album, but instead be just one of a few producers which includes RZA, Erick Sermon, Rockwilder, and some new younger producers such as Diggilo. He also expressed a desire to work with Odd Future frontman Tyler, The Creator. Throughout 2013, Method Man worked on material for Crystal Meth and significantly worked on the Wu-Tang Clan's sixth studio album, A Better Tomorrow. He also toured with Redman throughout the year. On January 1, 2014, Method Man announced that a mixtape titled The Meth Lab would be released in March 2014 and that Crystal Meth would be released in August 2014 on Tommy Boy Entertainment. However, Method Man released The Meth Lab as a mixtape album through Tommy Boy on August 21, 2015. In 2019 Method Man featured on the record 'Winnebago' with South London rapper Blue Meth. The music video was directed by Nick DonnellyCrystal Meth was again said to drop in August 2016 but still hasn't been released as of 2023.


== Acting career ==
In the late 1990s, Method Man began a career in acting. He has had recurring roles in critically acclaimed television shows such as HBO's Oz as Tug Daniels, HBO's The Wire as Prop Joe's nephew Cheese, The Twilight Zone, and CSI: Crime Scene Investigation, in which Method Man portrays Drops, a wealthy Las Vegas party promoter who clashes with the CSI team (specifically investigator Nick Stokes) in their investigations involving Drops' clubs or entourage, in the episodes "Poppin' Tags" (2006), "Big Shots" (2007), and "Drops Out" (2008).
Method Man and Redman hosted a pilot on MTV called Stung. Additionally, Method Man has made numerous appearances as himself on TV shows such as Mind of Mencia and Chappelle's Show.His first prominent role came in with the film Belly (1998), along with fellow rappers Nas and DMX. Method Man has since added many credits to his name, including roles in the films Garden State, One Eight Seven, and many others, with starring roles in feature films such as How High and Soul Plane. Method Man had a cameo in the horror movie Venom (2005), where he played a deputy who is killed shortly into the movie. On March 27, 2007, Redman confirmed on BET's show Rap City that the sequel to How High was being written; the script for How High 2 is being written by Dustin Lee Abraham of CSI, who also wrote the first movie. Method Man also appeared in the 2008 movies The Wackness (2008) and Meet the Spartans (2008).
Method Man stars in the Law & Order SVU episode "Snitch" as the main antagonist. The episode was first broadcast December 4, 2007.
Method Man appeared in the Def Jam series of video games. In Fight for NY he voiced Blaze, one of the main characters. In Icon, he voiced Gooch, a major character in the storyline. In Underground, he voiced Meth, one of the major characters.
He made a guest appearance in the music video for "If I Ain't Got You" (2003) by Alicia Keys, where he played the role of her boyfriend. He also appeared in Beanie Sigel's music video "Feel It in the Air", where Method Man played an undercover cop leading an operation against Sigel.
Method Man played the main antagonist, an arsonist wealthy executive, in an episode of the FOX TV show The Good Guys.
Method Man appears as Valentine, a hip hop business mogul, in the episode Bad Blood in season 2 of Burn Notice.
Method Man had a cameo appearance in the film Cop Land (1997), as a violent criminal who, while fleeing, throws Peter Berg's character off of a New York rooftop. Method Man has also appeared in the TV drama Wonderland, as a patient in a mental hospital.
Method Man plays a small role in the film The Sitter (2011), starring Jonah Hill. He also played crewman "Sticks" in the George Lucas movie Red Tails (2012), about the Tuskegee Airmen.
Method Man plays the leads in the films The Mortician (2011) and #Lucky Number (2015).In 2014, he voiced Phantasm, the primary antagonist on the FX animated comedy Chozen.
In 2016, he played himself in Difficult People, Luke Cage, and Paterson. Also that year, he portrayed "Cheddar" in the film Keanu.
In 2017, he became the host of the TBS series Drop the Mic, based on the popular recurring segment on The Late Late Show with James Corden.
Method Man played a recurring character in the HBO show The Deuce.In 2019, Method Man voiced Ben Urich in the scripted podcast Marvels. He also appeared in Shaft as Freddie P, an acquaintance of John Shaft (Samuel L. Jackson).
In 2020, Method Man appeared as a recurring character in the Netflix original series Teenage Bounty Hunters as Terrance Coin, Bowser's rival bounty hunter.
He also starred in the 2020 film Concrete Cowboy, an adaptation of the book Ghetto Cowboy.
In 2020, Method Man also starred as Father Jackson in Netflix film, Vampires vs. the Bronx.
In 2021, he made appearances as Samuel Christian in Season 2 of the MGM+ series, Godfather of Harlem.
He also currently stars in the current 50 Cent-produced series Power Book II: Ghost as Davis MacLean, Tasha's Lawyer.


== Other ventures ==
Method Man appeared in the documentary entitled The Show (1995). There is a scene in which Method Man, on a train in Japan, gets into an argument with U-God and Ghostface Killah, over camera time, radio interviews, and clothing mishaps.
In 2006, Method Man appeared on the MTV reality game show Yo Momma, in the pilot episode.
Method Man is the first of the Wu-Tang Clan to produce a series of eponymous graphic novels for Hachette Book Group USA's imprint Grand Central Publishing (to be followed by GZA and Ghostface Killah).In 2017, he became the co-host (with Hailey Baldwin) of a celebrity battle rap show Drop the Mic In February 2021, Method Man began hosting Marvel/Method, a podcast series for Marvel Entertainment and Sirius XM. The podcast features interviews with celebrity guests discussing Marvel comics, music, and culture.


== Personal life ==
Dating since 1992, Smith married Tamika in 2001. 
The couple have three children together: son Shakuan; and girl-boy twins Cheyenne and Raekwon.Tamika is a breast cancer survivor.His son Raekwon Smith  played football for Stony Brook University.Method Man is a comic book fan and has a collection of around 30,000 comics, including Hulk #181, which features the first full appearance of Wolverine.


=== Legal issues ===
On May 17, 2007, Method Man was arrested in New York City for marijuana possession. His SUV was pulled over near the Battery Tunnel toll booths for having an expired inspection sticker. An unidentified source said, "It was like something out of Cheech & Chong. He rolls down the window and the smoke would choke a horse." The arresting officer noticed two blunts and a plastic bag containing marijuana in plain view. Upon further inspection more marijuana was found under the driver's seat. Method Man was charged with unlawful possession of marijuana, criminal possession of marijuana, DWI, and driving an uninspected motor vehicle. He reached a plea agreement to perform community service including rapping to children about the dangers of drugs.On October 5, 2009, Method Man was arrested at his home in Staten Island for income tax violations. He was accused of failing to file income tax returns for the state of New York between 2004 and 2007, and owed nearly $33,000 in taxes.  On June 28, 2010, Method Man pleaded guilty to tax evasion and was sentenced to a conditional discharge and paid a $106,000 fine.


== Controversies ==


=== Wendy Williams ===
In 2006, Method Man had a personal and publicized conflict with TV talk show host Wendy Williams on The Breakdown, an Internet show on Onloq.com. Williams talked on air about Method Man's wife's having cancer, which was something he wanted to keep private and her own family members had not yet known about. He said that people who lived next door to him did not know, but Williams had dug it up and made it public over the radio. Because of this leaked information, Method Man and his wife had many problems.Williams also reported rumors that Method Man had been having an affair with his wife's doctor. Method Man first heard of this while in recording sessions in Los Angeles.


=== Sean Combs ===
During a concert in 2006, Method Man criticized Diddy's decisions on Duets: The Final Chapter, the posthumous album by The Notorious B.I.G., saying that Biggie never would have worked with some of the rappers.


=== Fox Television ===
In 2004, Method Man starred in a Fox sitcom called Method & Red. However, after only a short time on the air, the show was put on hiatus and never returned. Method Man later spoke to the press about Fox's influence on the show's style, saying that "there's been too much compromise on our side and not enough on their side", and criticizing the network's decision to add a laugh track. Before the show premiered, he was telling fans not to bother watching it. He told the Los Angeles Times:

This is frustrating for me. I'm trying to keep this show ghetto, and there's a way for it to be both ghetto and intelligent. But it's not going that way.


== Discography ==


== Filmography ==


=== Film ===


=== Television ===


=== Music Videos ===


=== Video Games ===


=== Documentary ===


== References ==


== External links ==
Method Man discography at Discogs 
Method Man at AllMusic 
Method Man at IMDb 
Method Man at CurlieMichael Louis Diamond (born November 20, 1965), better known as Mike D, is an American rapper, musician, and music producer.  He is a founding member of the hip hop group Beastie Boys.


== Early life ==
Diamond was born in New York City to Harold Diamond, an art dealer, and Hester (née Klein) Diamond, an interior designer and art collector.  He grew up on the Upper West Side surrounded by artwork, including pieces by Willem de Kooning, Mark Rothko, and Barnett Newman. He attended the arts-oriented Saint Ann's School and Walden School.


== Career ==
In 1979, Diamond co-founded the band The Young Aborigines. In 1981, Adam Yauch, (known professionally as MCA), a friend and follower of the band, became their bass player, and on the suggestion of their then-guitar player, John Berry, the band changed their name to the Beastie Boys. By 1983, Adam Horovitz (Ad-Rock) joined, and their sound began to shift away from punk to hip hop.In 1992, Diamond founded the Beastie Boys' now-defunct record label Grand Royal Records. He is also interested in interior design, and designed Brooklyn-themed toile wallpaper; it was used in the renovation of the Marquee nightclub in Chelsea, which reopened in January 2013.A year after the death of Yauch in 2012, Diamond told Rolling Stone he was "excited about making new stuff again" and released "Humberto Vs the New Reactionaries (Christine and the Queens Remix)" in July 2013. A remix of Yoko Ono Plastic Ono Band's "Bad Dancer" by Diamond and Adam Horovitz was streamed online in August 2013.  The pair is credited with "additional beats, programming and other curve balls". In October 2014, Diamond stated that he had been working in the studio with American rock band Portugal. The Man as a producer. He has also produced English punk duo SOFT PLAY's (formerly Slaves) second studio album, Take Control, which was released on September 30, 2016.He hosts the Apple Music podcast The Echo Chamber.


== Personal life ==
In 1993, Diamond married film, television and music video director Tamra Davis; they have since legally separated. They have two children, Davis Diamond and Skyler Diamond who formed the group Very Nice Person. They lived in Cobble Hill, Brooklyn.He grew up on Central Park West. He later lived in Brooklyn and Tribeca, and as of 2016 was living in Malibu, California.


== Discography ==

with Beastie Boys 

Licensed to Ill (1986)
Paul's Boutique (1989)
Check Your Head (1992)
Ill Communication (1994)
Hello Nasty (1998)
To the 5 Boroughs (2004)
The Mix-Up (2007)
Hot Sauce Committee Part Two (2011)


== References ==


== External links ==

Mike D discography at DiscogsMichael Anthony Deering (born November 25, 1967), known by his stage name Mikey D, is an American rapper. He is best known for being a lead member of the groups Mikey D & The L.A. Posse and Main Source. As a member of Main Source, he replaced Large Professor, who parted ways with the group due to business differences. In 1994, he appeared on Main Source's second album, Fuck What You Think, as the lead MC.


== Early life and education ==
Mikey D was born on November 25, 1967, in Laurelton, Queens, New York City, New York. Born to Linda Deering and Victor Fisher. His parents were separated when he was young and was raised by his grandparents, Jerome and Betty Deering in Laurelton Queens, New York. He attended PS 37 in Queens. He then attended JHS 231 in Queens.
He attended Springfield Gardens High School.


== Career ==
Mikey first started rapping at a young age at his junior high school, after hearing music by the Cold Crush Brothers and Clientele Brothers, which inspired him to become an MC. He was the youngest member to join the Clientele Brothers, a group of emcees consisting of Eddie O'Jay and Will Seville He would be writing rhymes and freestyling in parks and areas around his neighborhood, getting training help by O'Jay and Seville, trying to develop his skills and rhymes flows in his adolescence.While in high school, he met future emcee/actor LL Cool J. Although, him and Mikey didn't go to the same school together. They went to their own separate schools. James went to Andrew Jackson High School. They would come over to each of their own schools they were attending and freestyling rhymes with each other. He was known as J-Ski, but Mikey would suggest a new name for his moniker. He would give him a stage name "Ladies Love", but didn't want it in his stage name. He shortened it to just "LL", put it next to the word "Cool" and added "J", which stood for his first name, James.In 1985, Mikey and his group called the Symbolic Three, got signed to Reality Records. Around that year, he and his friend Johnnie Quest met inspiring upcoming producer named Paul "Paul C" McKasty, through Cliente Brothers members Eddie O'Jay and Will Seville.He formed a group with the late Paul C and childhood friend DJ Johnnie Quest. According to Deering, he stated that his group originally wanted to be called "Boom Bash", but one of his managers didn't think it was a good idea. The group was called Mikey D & the L.A. Posse. They were signed to Public Records. They had a single which was released in 1987, song called "My Telephone", along with tracks like "Dawn" and "Bust a Rhyme". He followed up with two other singles "I Get Rough" & "Go For It" in the same year.In 1988, Mikey D was the winner of the New Music Seminar Battle for World Supremacy where he battled Melle Mel.While recording an album with his group, he learned that Paul C was murdered in his sleep at his home. There were disputes between another group who were also named the L.A. Posse, a group from Los Angeles and Sleeping Bag Records, a label that Mikey was signed to. Sleeping Bag Records was forced to drop the group's name after being sued for name duplication and Mikey  took a three-year break from the music business after the death of producer Paul "Paul C" McKasty. While spending time in Miami, Florida, his manager was Mike Beasley at the time. He had a cousin who own a studio in Manhattan, New York City, New York. He would try to find a label that was gonna give Mikey a record deal but he caught the attention of R&B singer Jeff Redd who heard his freestyling raps. He told him there was a group that needed a lead rapper for the group Main Source. He contacted them and freestyled raps to the group and liked what they heard.In 1993, he become an official member of the critically acclaimed Toronto/Queens-based hip hop group Main Source after Large Professor left to pursue a solo career. He appeared on Fuck What You Think on Wild Pitch Records in 1994. They released a single called "What You Need", which did well in Billboard's Hot Rap Singles, only peaking at #48.
He is featured on a song called "Pump Ya Fist Like This" on Large Professor's 2008's third album, Main Source.
In 2020, Mikey released a distribution company called Pass the Torch, where he is the founder and currently operates his own company.Mikey currently hosts his own show on YouTube called The Real Mikey D History (His-story), a documentary series released in 2021.


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===
with Main Source

Fuck What You Think (1994, Wild Pitch Records)as Mikey D and the LA Posse

Better Late Than Never: In Memory of Paul C (2006, MicSic)Solo albums

Day of D'Struction (2016, Elements of Hip-Hop)Collaboration albums

Dramacide  (with DJ Trouble Lee) (2019, 16F)Extended plays

Calm Before the Storm (with Elements of Hip-Hop) (2013)
From the Heart (with J-Soul) (2014)


=== Guest appearances ===
2005: "The Perfect Storm" (Cee-Rock "The Fury" album Bringin' Da' Yowzah!!!)
2008: "Pump Ya Fist Like This" (Large Professor album Main Source)
2013: "Sweet 16s" (Neek the Exotic album Hustle Don't Stop)
2013: "The Amazing" (Red Venom album Red House)
2013: "The Operation" (DJ Shark album Oxidized Silver)
2015: "Mikey Destruction, Devastating Tito & DJ Slice" (Canibus & Bronze Nazareth album Time Flys, Life Dies...Phoenix Rise)
2019: "The Spark" (Taiyamo Denku album The Book of Cyphaden - Chapter One)
2021: "Nyghtlife" (The Good People album The Greater Good)


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Mikey D discography at Discogs
Mikey D's Distribution CompanyDerrick Carrington Gray (born December 24, 1993), known professionally as Derrick Milano, is an American songwriter, rapper, and singer. He grew up in Philadelphia and in Delaware before moving to Florida for college. He began his musical career as a rapper in 2013 before shifting to songwriting in 2019. He has since written songs for artists including Justin Bieber, Pop Smoke, Nicki Minaj, and Megan Thee Stallion. In 2021, he won the Grammy Award for Best Rap Song at the 63rd Annual Grammy Awards for co-writing the rap song "Savage Remix" by Megan Thee Stallion and featuring Beyoncé.


== Early life and education ==
Derrick Gray was born in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, to Virginia and Jeff Gray. Gray first gained experience in music as a member of his church's choir. His family moved to Brandywine Hundred, Delaware, when he was in seventh grade, and he attended Hanby Middle School, Brandywine High School, and Red Lion Christian Academy, before graduating from Concord High School in 2012. While in high school, Gray would battle rap with friends and was a member of the school choir.After graduating from high school, Gray attended college in Florida, including at Valencia College and Full Sail University, where he was involved in Business Professionals of America.


== Career ==


=== Early career (2013–2018) ===
Milano began his music career while in college, where he distributed mixtapes for his music. His breakout success came with the release of the "trap-happy" single "#ThatAintYaBitch", which he released on SoundCloud in May 2014. As a result of the single's success, he was invited to open for artists playing shows at Orlando-area venues, including for rappers Young Thug and Future. Following this early success, a dispute with his management made releasing and promoting music challenging for Milano.


=== Writing and Grammy (2019–present) ===

Milano's first writing experience came on Kevin Gates' 2019 album I'm Him. In May 2019, Juicy J, who Milano first connected with when he was in high school, invited Milano to help with Megan Thee Stallion's song "Simon Says". This led to an uncredited writing opportunity on "Hot Girl Summer", another song by Megan Thee Stallion, which was released in July 2019.Milano continued to work with Megan Thee Stallion, co-writing "Savage Remix", which features Beyoncé and was released in April 2020. In March 2021, Milano won the Grammy Award for Best Rap Song at the 63rd Annual Grammy Awards for his work as a co-writer on "Savage Remix".As of March 2021, Milano was working on his debut album, which will include tracks featuring Juicy J, Ty Dolla Sign, and Wiz Khalifa and is scheduled to be released later in 2021.In 2023, Milano was featured on a remix to Ciara's song "Da Girls". It was released on May 12, 2023.


== Awards and nominations ==


== References ==Robert Rihmeek Williams (born May 6, 1987), known professionally as Meek Mill, is an American rapper. 
Born and raised in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, he embarked on his music career as a battle rapper, and later formed a short-lived rap group, The Bloodhoundz. In 2008, Atlanta-based rapper T.I. signed Williams to his first record deal. In February 2011, after leaving Grand Hustle Records, Williams signed with Miami-based rapper Rick Ross's Maybach Music Group (MMG). Williams' debut studio album, Dreams and Nightmares, was released in 2012 through a joint venture between MMG and Warner Bros. Records. The album, preceded by the lead single "Amen" (featuring Drake), peaked at number two on the U.S. Billboard 200.
Williams rose mainstream recognition after featuring on MMG's Self Made compilation album, as his debut singles "Tupac Back" (featuring Rick Ross) and "Ima Boss" (featuring Rick Ross), were included on volume one (2011). He released his second album, Dreams Worth More Than Money, in 2015 and his third album, Wins & Losses, in 2016. His fourth album, Championships, was released in November 2018 and debuted at the top of the Billboard 200 chart. Its lead single, "Going Bad" (featuring Drake), peaked at number six on the Billboard Hot 100, marking Williams' highest charting single to date. Williams' fifth album, Expensive Pain, was released on October 1, 2021. Williams launched his own label titled Dream Chasers Records in 2012, which would promptly release his output and sign other artists, including singers Yung Bleu and Vory.
In November 2017, he was sentenced to two to four years in prison for violating parole, before being released while his trial continues after serving five months. In August 2019, a documentary series about his battle with the criminal justice system, Free Meek, was released on Amazon Prime Video. Rapper Jay-Z executive produced the series; he and Williams would later co-found the nonprofit Reform Alliance the same year, which focuses on national prison reform.


== Early life ==
Robert Rihmeek Williams was born on May 6, 1987, in the South Philadelphia area of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, the son of Kathy Williams. He has an older sister, Nasheema Williams. Kathy grew up in poverty and her mother died when she was young. Meek's father was killed when Meek was five years old, apparently during an attempted robbery. His uncle, Robert, described Meek Mill's father as a "black sheep of the family". After her husband's death, Kathy moved with Meek and his sister to North Philadelphia, where they lived in a three-bedroom apartment on Berks Street. Their financial condition was poor and she started cutting hair, doing other jobs, and shoplifting in order to support her family. At home, Meek was shy and rarely spoke. As a kid, he became acquainted with another of his father's brothers, who under the MC name Grandmaster Nell was a pioneering disc jockey (DJ) in the late-1980s Philadelphia hip-hop scene and influenced rap artists Will Smith and DJ Jazzy Jeff. Meek's interest in hip-hop grew as a result of these early influences. He was also influenced by the independent hip-hop artists Chic Raw and Vodka, whom he learned to emulate by watching their DVDs.During his early teenage years, Meek often took part in rap battles under the pseudonym Meek Millz. He often stayed up well past midnight filling notebooks with phrases and verses that he later drew on. Later he and three friends formed the rap group The Bloodhoundz. They bought blank CDs and jewel cases at Kinkos, encouraging friends to burn them with the group's songs and distribute them.


== Career ==


=== 2006–2010: Career beginnings ===
The Bloodhoundz lasted long enough to release four mixtapes. From 2006 to 2008 Mill released three solo mixtapes including The Real Me, The Real Me 2, and Flamers. In 2009, Mill released his fourth solo mixtape, Flamers 2: Hottest in tha City, which spawned the promotional singles "I'm So Fly," "Prolli," and "Hottest in the City." Flamers 2 caught the attention of Charles "Charlie Mack" Alston, founder and president of 215 Aphillyated Records. Mack, who previously represented for other Philadelphians Will Smith, DJ Jazzy Jeff, Boyz II Men and Ms. Jade, was so impressed with Mill that he immediately signed him to his management company. During that same year, Meek Mill also met the founder and owner of Grand Hustle Records, Atlanta-based rapper and record executive T.I. T.I. was also impressed by Mill and offered him an opportunity to travel, to meet with him and Warner Bros. Records; within a week both record companies offered him a deal. Although he was offered other record deals, Mill felt collaborating with T.I. was "an opportunity of a lifetime" and thus chose his label. However, a setback occurred, when Mill was sentenced to a stint in jail for a drug and gun charge.After being released in 2009, he continued working as an artist under Grand Hustle, Mill formed a work relationship with the label's resident disc jockey, DJ Drama. Mill and Drama teamed up to release the third edition of Mill's Flamers series. The mixtape, titled Flamers 3: The Wait Is Over, was released on March 12, 2010, and is helmed as a "Gangsta Grillz mixtape". The mixtape features his promotional single "Rosé Red", which was later remixed with additional verses from fellow American rappers T.I., Rick Ross and Vado. Rick Ross contributed his verse after he was visiting Philadelphia and asked his Twitter followers who he should collaborate with; Meek Mill was the overwhelming response. The remix was included on Mill's following mixtape, Mr. Philadelphia. Due to Mill and T.I.'s respective legal troubles, Mill was never able to release an official album under Grand Hustle and they parted ways in 2010. That same year, a film was released  called Streets. A direct-to-DVD crime drama, starring Mill, produced by Alston and directed by Jamal Hill.


=== 2011–2012: Dreams & Nightmares ===
In February 2011, Rick Ross announced the signing of Mill along with fellow American rapper Wale to his Maybach Music Group (MMG) label. In March 2011, Mill was included in XXL's "Freshman Class of 2011". Later that year, he released his debut single, "Tupac Back", featuring Rick Ross, from his label's compilation album Self Made Vol. 1 (2011). That same year he released his second single, "Ima Boss", also take from the compilation and featuring Ross. The song was later remixed, featuring T.I., Birdman, Lil Wayne, DJ Khaled, Swizz Beatz and Rick Ross. The remix charted on the Billboard Hot 100 and peaked at No. 51, becoming Mill's most successful single at that time. In August 2011, Mill released Dreamchasers, a well received mixtape featuring his urban hit "House Party" and guest appearances from Rick Ross, Yo Gotti and Beanie Sigel among others.
In February 2012, MTV listed Meek Mill as the "#7 hottest MC" in their annual "Hottest MCs in the Game" list. On May 7, 2012, Mill released the second installment to his Dreamchasers series. Within six hours of its release on mixtape website DatPiff.com, Dreamchasers 2 was downloaded 1.5 million times. On May 10, it was announced Meek Mill signed with Roc Nation management.On June 19, 2012, "Amen" - originally included on Dreamchasers 2, was released as the lead single from Mill's debut studio album. Before releasing his debut studio album Dreams & Nightmares, Mill received co-signs from both Mariah Carey and Nas, with him appearing on Carey's 2012 single "Triumphant (Get 'Em)" and the latter stating, "I got my eyes on him. He's the next one to take this shit over." The album was released on October 30, 2012. The album debuted at number two on the US Billboard 200 chart with first-week sales of 165,000 copies. In its second week, the album sold 41,000 more copies, dropping six spots on the chart to number eight.


=== 2013–2017: Dreams Worth More Than Money, DC4 and Wins & Losses ===

Mill released the third installment of the Dreamchasers series, Dreamchasers 3. The mixtape featured guest appearances from Rick Ross, Akon, Future, Waka Flocka Flame, Wale, Trina and Jadakiss among others. The mixtape was scheduled to be released on May 6, 2013. However, he had announced that it would be pushed back, eventually to be released on September 29, 2013. In November 2013, Mill announced thathe was half-way finished with his second studio album. On March 8, 2014, Mill announced that the album would be titled Dreams Worth More Than Money. Mill's album, Dreams Worth More Than Money, which was released on June 28, 2015, topped the Billboard 200 as of the issue dated July 18, 2015.
Meek Mill posted 6 videos on his Instagram previewing music for his mixtape, DC4. The mixtape was planned to have featured a remix of his enemy, Drake's song, "Back to Back", and a remix to Drake and Future's song, "I'm the Plug", but unfortunately, due to DC4 being released commercially, neither of these two remixes made the final cut. On January 16, 2016, Meek Mill dropped songs on his extended play, 4/4, with 4 tracks. On January 30, 2016, Meek Mill released another extended play title 4/4, Pt. 2.
Meek Mill released DC4 on October 28, 2016.
On July 21, 2017, Mill released his third studio album titled Wins & Losses.


=== 2018–2021: Championships and Expensive Pain ===

On November 16, 2018, Mill announced his fourth album, Championships, which was released on November 30. The album received positive reviews from critics and debuted atop the US Billboard 200, selling 229,000 album-equivalent units in its first week (42,000 coming from pure sales).
In June 2020, Mill released his protest song "Otherside of America", amid the protests following the murder of George Floyd.
On November 20, 2020, Meek returned with a four-track EP, Quarantine Pack, which features rappers 42 Dugg, Vory, and Lil Durk, who also appears in the video for the track, "Pain Away". That same month, the film, Charm City Kings, was released exclusively on HBO Max. Originally scheduled for a May 2020 theatrical release by Sony Pictures, it was delayed due to the COVID-19 pandemic and later acquired by HBO. The Angel Manuel Soto-directed and Will Smith-produced drama stars Mill and opposite Jahi Di'Allo Winston as street bikers who end up under a wave of crime in Baltimore. It received positive critical reviews. A month earlier, in October, Mill also claimed to have had plans to release an album before the end of the year. However, this did not occur, as his fifth studio album, Expensive Pain, was only released a year later, on October 1, 2021. It debuted at number three on the Billboard 200 after accumulating 95,000 equivalent units. Mill went on to state that Atlantic Records was responsible for the low sales of the album. He went as afar to state that the label wouldn't allow him to bring PnB Rock nor Roddy Ricch as artists to his Dream Chasers imprint, while also clarifying that Atlantic restricted him from releasing any more music for the following nine months and demanded his release alongside labelmates, fellow Philadelphian Lil Uzi Vert, and YoungBoy Never Broke Again.On July 11, 2022, Mill confirmed that he had ended his management deal with Jay-Z's Roc Nation Entertainment, stating that although he and the company are no longer partners in the exact term, he and Jay remain on good terms. Despite his departure, the two still work on their prison reform venture, the REFORM Alliance.


== Dream Chasers Records ==

On October 26, 2012, Meek Mill announced the launch of his own record label imprint, Dream Chasers Records, with the flagship artists Louie V. Gutta, Lee Mazin and Goldie. On July 24, 2019, Meek Mill announced the official launch of Dream Chasers Records as a joint venture with Roc Nation. Mill spoke on the deal saying "Creating a record label has always been the next step in my journey as a businessman and I appreciate Roc Nation and Jay-Z's support on this new venture. I want to take my experiences in the music industry, use them to find young, hungry talent and open doors for the next generation of artists." The label also handles its own operations, creative strategy, marketing and business affairs. Jay-Z spoke on the joint venture, saying "Everything he has done leading up to this point shows he is ready to [lead] the next generation. We look at the big picture — this is way beyond signing artists and having hot records." As president of the label, Mill oversees a team in a corporate New York office and also help operate a recording studio for the label's artists.


== Legal issues ==


=== Criminal proceedings ===


==== 2005-2006: Police brutality and first arrest ====
When he was 18, while walking to a corner store armed, Meek was arrested for illegally possessing a firearm and was beaten up by the police. Because of the beating, his lips and both eyes became swollen and one of his braids was ripped out. He was charged with attempted or aggravated assault against a police officer after two black cops gave a statement against him in the case, saying he chased them down with a gun and tried to shoot one of them. He was then placed on probation.


==== 2008: Drug and gun conviction ====
In 2008, Mill was convicted of possession of drug paraphernalia, and second-degree possession of a loaded firearm by a convicted felon. He was sentenced to eleven to twenty-three months in prison, followed by eight years probation, by Philadelphia County Superior Court Judge Genece Brinkley. After Mill's 2008 conviction, Brinkley continued to handle Mill's further legal cases and oversaw his probation. Mill was released in early 2009 under a five-year parole agreement after serving seven months. In January 2023, Pennsylvania governor Tom Wolf pardoned Mill for these convictions.


==== 2012-2016: Several violations, incarceration and house arrest ====
On the night of Halloween 2012, following an album release party for his debut, Dreams and Nightmares, in South Philadelphia, Mill was detained by city police after a car which he was riding in was pulled over. The outcome of the arrest remains unknown; no charges were filed, and Mill was released from custody. However, in December, because of the incident, Mill was found to have violated his probation for his 2008 federal drug and gun charges, resulting in Judge Brinkley revoking Mill's travel permit.In May 2013, Mill was again found to have violated his probation and ordered to take etiquette classes. The violation was a failure to report travel plans as required and social media postings that resulted in death threats to the probation officer who assigned his case. In requiring the classes and stressing the requirement to report travel, Brinkley noted, "You need to try to get this right next time." In June 2013, the court noted that Mill continually failed to report his travel plans. Brinkley established an August deadline for the classes, noting that Mill has "a lot of issues" and that the classes would provide him with a "big-picture perspective" on his personal and professional actions. Brinkley said the classes were "more important than any concerts he might have." Of the requirement to provide travel plans to his probation officer, Mill complained, "You just gonna miss money all day." The ADA explained that it was a consequence of being on probation. On July 11, 2014, Mill's probation was revoked and he was sentenced to three to six months in jail. He was released on December 2, 2014.He was found guilty for a parole violation again on December 17, 2015, due to him performing at an Atlanta show for Nicki Minaj's Pinkprint tour, the 2015 BET Awards and American Music Awards respectively, all without reporting his actions as related court orders to gain approval. The judge hearing his case refused to give him a second chance and ordered him not to work or perform before his sentencing on February 5, 2016. He was sentenced to 90 days of house arrest on February 5. The sentence became effective on March 1. Mill was not allowed to work and was required to do daily community service with groups serving adults. He was also sentenced to an extended six years probation. On June 2, 2016, Mill was sentenced to eight additional days of house arrest as a result of him not completing his required community service hours. His house arrest ended fifteen days later.


==== 2017: St. Louis and New York arrests; parole violation and imprisonment ====
On March 11, 2017, Mill was arrested at the St. Louis Lambert International Airport in Missouri for assaulting two employees. Shortly after his arrest, he was given a court summons. Then, in August, he was detained in New York City after a noise complaint was filed over Mill popping a wheelie on his motorcycle. Soon after, he was released once the disturbance violation and reckless driving charges were dropped. The case was later taken to court in October, and was to be dismissed if Mill would have completed six months of therapy, resulting in good behavior and thirty hours of community service added to his Pennsylvania-state related twenty-hour term. On November 6, 2017, he was sentenced to two to four years in state prison for violating his parole. He served five months at the State Correctional Institution – Chester in Chester, Pennsylvania.On April 24, 2018, Mill was released, pending outcome of an appeal to the Pennsylvania supreme court. The Philadelphia district attorney petitioned Brinkley for his release, citing credibility issues with the arresting officer in his initial 2008 conviction. Brinkley declined and instead scheduled the case for a hearing. Hours after his release from prison, Michael G. Rubin, a minority owner of the Philadelphia 76ers and longtime supporter of Mill, flew Mill in by helicopter to a 76ers game to perform a ceremonial bell-ringing on the court. Garnering support from other public figures such as Jay-Z and fellow Philadelphian Kevin Hart, Mill has said that he would like to use his situation to "shine a light" on the criminal justice system.On July 24, 2019, the Superior Court of Pennsylvania granted Mill's appeal, overturning his 2008 conviction and ordering a new trial to be overseen by another judge other than Judge Brinkley. In a statement, the Philadelphia District Attorney's Office said it was pleased that the appeals court "validated our position that Robert Rihmeek Williams deserves a new trial before a court that has no appearance of partiality." However, the D.A. declined comment on its plans for a new trial, stating the office was weighing its options before proceeding.


==== 2018: Allegations of federal corruption ====
Reports alleged that there was an FBI investigation into the conduct of Brinkley, the judge presiding over his case. This was later publicly acknowledged by Mill's defense team. Mill's attorney, Joe Tacopina, made several allegations of inappropriate statements and actions by Brinkley, including that "she requested he re-record a Boyz II Men song and shout her out, and how she wanted him to leave [the management of] Roc Nation to sign with a friend of hers", referring to Mill's former partner, Charlie Mack of 215 Aphillyated, and that "she showed up at his community service" when a typical judge would not, among several other irregularities.In February 2018, the officer of Mill's original 2007 case was brought under scrutiny for the potential mishandling of his arrest. This came upon a whistle-blower's testimony responsible for the revelation of hundreds of other corrupt officers. An appeal to reverse Mill's conviction was submitted.With Mill's continuous arrests and probation from Brinkley, he is estimated by his booking agency and management to have lost millions of dollars in profit.


==== 2019: Misdemeanor firearm charge and Free Meek ====
In August 2019, Mill pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor firearm charge in Philadelphia. All other charges were dismissed, officially ending the case against Mill from 2007 and temporarily dismissing him as a convicted felon.On August 9, 2019, a docuseries Free Meek premiered on Amazon Prime Video. The five-part series was produced by Roc Nation, with Mill and Jay-Z serving as executive producers.


=== Civil suits ===
On November 29, 2017, Meek Mill and Roc Nation were sued by the family of Jaquan Graves, who was shot and killed in the parking lot outside a Connecticut concert in December 2016. Graves had just left the facility when gunfire started and he was killed. The lawsuit also claims that Mill and Roc Nation allowed "thugs" to remain on the premises after exhibiting disorderly, disruptive, argumentative, angry and agitated behaviors toward patrons.


=== Allegations against Cosmopolitan Resort ===
In May 2019, Meek Mill was turned away from the Cosmopolitan of Las Vegas when attempting to attend a show. His attorney, Joe Tacopina, alleged that Mill was turned away because of his race. On May 25, 2019, Mill said that he intended to pursue legal action against the hotel for racial discrimination. Within days, the Cosmopolitan issued the requested apology. Tacopina then announced that his client had accepted it, and no lawsuit would be forthcoming.


== Philanthropy and activism ==
In 2016, Meek Mill spent $50,000 to donate 60,000 Ice Mountain brand bottled water to contribute to and support the Flint water crisis in Michigan as he teamed up with Big Sean.In 2018, following his release from state custody, Mill immediately became a leading advocate of criminal justice reform in the United States, where he transitioned his advocacy into the co-formation of Reform Alliance with fellow recording artist and entrepreneur Jay-Z. The nonprofit organization states its mission is "to dramatically reduce the number of people who are unjustly under the control of the criminal justice system – starting with probation and parole", where it plans on doing so by gathering leaders from various fields such as business, entertainment, government, sports, technology, and more, who have the common interest of donating and advocating for criminal justice reform in the United States. Later, in August 2018, Mill donated 6,000 backpacks to students of Philadelphia.
The founding partners of Reform Alliance, besides Meek Mill and Jay-Z, includes Kraft Group CEO and New England Patriots owner Robert Kraft, Philadelphia 76ers owner Michael G. Rubin, Brooklyn Nets co-owner Clara Wu Tsai, Vista Equity Partners founder Robert F. Smith, as well as other leaders in business, law and politics, whom have collectively pledged a total 50 million dollars to the foundation as of 2019. To lead the organization, Reform hired political activist, and CNN host/political analyst Van Jones as their inaugural CEO.


== Controversies ==


=== "Amen" ===
Following the release of the lead single for Dreams & Nightmares, entitled "Amen", Philadelphia area pastor Rev. Jomo K. Johnson called for a boycott of Mill due to the song's lyrical content. "As a hip-hop fan, I want to encourage every rap fan in Philadelphia who is a believer in Jesus Christ, to boycott Meek Mill until he acknowledges this blatant disrespect. And being a resident of North Philadelphia and a pastor, I revoke Meek's 'hood pass' until this happens," Johnson said in a statement.
On July 17, 2012, in an interview on the BET show 106 & Park, Mill stated, "I don't think no preacher or no church approves of any type of rap music—because rap music, period, is a lot of bad stuff said. But at the end of the day, it's real life. And me, I wasn't trying to disrespect no religion or anything like that."


=== Feuds ===


==== Cassidy ====
A feud started between Meek Mill and fellow Philadelphia-born rapper Cassidy, when Mill offered to battle several underground rappers including Cassidy. Cassidy would later accept the challenge, adding "if the money was right". They participated in a short social exchange, after which Cassidy released "The Diary of a Hustla", which was originally thought to be a diss track towards Mill. This was later refuted by Cassidy. They both asked $100,000 each for the battle to take place. However, after Meek Mill dissed Cassidy's song, "Condom Style" (a remake of Psy's "Gangnam Style"), Cassidy released a formal diss track towards Mill with "Me, Myself & iPhone". Afterwards, Meek Mill responded with the diss track "Repo", which Mill later said would be the final diss record he would release against Cassidy.Cassidy later said the feud was not personal, saying it was all in the spirit of hip hop. On January 6, 2013, Cassidy released a 10-minute-long diss response titled "Raid". Eight months later, on September 5, 2013, Meek Mill released another diss record towards Cassidy, titled "Kendrick You Next". This was despite the fact that he said "Repo" would be his final diss record. Three days later, Cassidy released a diss record titled "Catch A Body", as a response. By 2017, the two rappers had resolved their differences.


==== Drake ====
In July 2015, Meek Mill publicly criticized Canadian Toronto-based entertainer Drake on Twitter, calling him out for not writing his own lyrics. In a series of tweets, the rapper claimed his counterpart used a ghostwriter for "R.I.C.O.", a song off Mill's second album, Dreams Worth More Than Money. He also admitted that he was upset that Drake did not promote the album on Twitter, upon its release. "Stop comparing [me to] Drake. He don't write his own raps. That's why he ain't tweet my album because we found out!", Meek Mill commented. Meek Mill had identified the ghostwriter as Quentin Miller, a local rapper from Atlanta. Meek Mill's claims received support from Funkmaster Flex, an American hip hop DJ on New York City's Hot 97 radio station. Flex released multiple audio recordings of reference tracks featuring Quentin Miller performing the soon-to-be Drake songs, "10 Bands", "Used To", "Know Yourself" and his guest verse on "R.I.C.O." Drake was later supported by his long-time friend, collaborator and co-founder of OVO Sound, award-winning multi-platinum selling producer Noah "40" Shebib, who claimed that not only does Drake write his own songs, he has also written number-one records for other artists. "No one is as talented as Drake… [there are] countless number ones and songs Drake has written for others never mind himself", 40 said on Twitter.On July 25, 2015, Drake premiered a track, titled "Charged Up" on the Beats 1 OVO Radio Show that is widely seen as a response to Meek Mill's allegations. Drake highlighted Meek Mill's relatively low sales volume and further claimed that the rapper was fading into obscurity. Drake also dissed Funkmaster Flex by promoting his rival DJ Clue?. On July 29, Drake released an aggressive diss track, named "Back to Back", that further attacked Meek Mill. The track, streamed over 500,000 times in 4 hours, heavily suggested that Mill's relationship with Nicki Minaj is lopsided in the latter's favor and also further criticized the former for not responding to "Charged Up" and for only relying on Twitter to attack Drake. The track was released for streaming on the OVO SoundCloud account and on Apple Music. The next day, Meek Mill released a track attacking Drake titled "Wanna Know" through Funkmaster Flex on Hot 97. On "Wanna Know", Meek Mill revealed another reference track, ghostwritten by Quentin Miller for Drake, who he criticized for being soft. Meek Mill also dissed AR-Ab on the track, and claimed that Drake was urinated on inside a movie theatre. Mill then removed the song from SoundCloud and said that he was moving on from his feud with Drake after WWE sent him a cease and desist.On January 30, 2016, Drake released a new diss track aimed at Mill, titled "Summer Sixteen", as the buzz single, used to promote his fourth studio album, Views. Less than fifteen minutes later, Mill released a response track with his cousin and label mate Omelly called "War Pain". The track references several lines from "Summer Sixteen", including an incident in which Drake played "Back to Back" in a public hotel, in which, he had a room directly above Mill. Four months later, Mill released a remix of Fat Joe and Remy Ma's "All the Way Up" with fellow rappers Fabolous and Jadakiss. Meek directly references Drake in several lines of the song, such as "If you didn't write it, don't record it." He also implied that he was in a relationship with Drake's current love interest, Rihanna. Meek Mill and Drake were both respectively endorsed by Burger King and Whataburger for their feud.After Mill's release from prison in 2018, the feud was officially squashed. Drake was featured on Mill's song "Going Bad", from his post-incarceration album Championships.


==== The Game ====
On September 16, 2016, The Game released a five-minute freestyle, "92 Bars", which was rumored to be a diss towards Meek Mill. Previously, Mill and Game collaborated on 2015's "The Soundtrack". Hours after the release of "92 Bars", Game admitted that the freestyle was specifically a diss towards Mill. The next day, the two rappers ended up in an Instagram exchange, with The Game cyber-flirting with Meek Mill's girlfriend, Nicki Minaj, as well as accusing Mill of informing the authorities of a robbery involving Sean Kingston. On September 18 Meek Mill released a diss track toward Game, a remix to Young M.A.'s "Ooouuu" with Omelly and fellow Philadelphia-based rapper Beanie Sigel. Two days later, The Game responded with "Pest Control", using the same beat and sending shots at Meek Mill, Omelly, Beanie Sigel, and Sean Kingston. In 2018 the two reconciled after Mill's incarceration and subsequent release from prison.


==== Beanie Sigel ====
A dispute between Meek Mill and Beanie Sigel ensued on September 26, 2016, when the latter ridiculed the former's intelligence towards him through a radio interview. Minutes after the interview, Sigel was punched on the back of his head by someone who was believed to have been one of Meek Mill's affiliates. Three days later Mill criticized Sigel through many derogatory Instagram messages. Later Mill dissed Sigel, The Game and Drake in a freestyle on Funkmaster Flex's radio show. Sigel responded by releasing a diss track titled "I'm Coming". In November 2018, Sigel supported Mill's album, Championships, stating there were "no skips" on the album, assumably ending the dispute between the two.


==== 6ix9ine ====
In an interview with Power 106 in November 2018, when Meek Mill was asked about rapper 6ix9ine, who was arrested on racketeering, weapons and drugs charges earlier that month, he spoke about wanting to warn him of the consequences of his antics. In January 2019, after it was revealed that 6ix9ine would be cooperating with prosecutors, Meek tweeted that he already predicted that 6ix9ine would do so, and would continually diss him for that. After 6ix9ine was released earlier from prison in 2020, he and Mill continued to take shots at each other; at one time Mill called 6ix9ine's song "Gooba" "trash". In June 2020, 6ix9ine criticized Mill for releasing his protest song, "Otherside of America", while not "protesting".  On February 14, 2021, the rappers got into an altercation outside an Atlanta club, in which 6ix9ine clowned Mill for having security around him and lunged at them, but was stopped by Mill's security. Both rappers posted videos of the incident. On February 19, 2021, 6ix9ine released a diss track towards Mill, titled "Zaza", with a music video that includes a clip of the altercation. In response, Mill issued a cease and desist to 6ix9ine.


==== Other feuds ====
In August 2013, Mill was one of the many rappers mentioned by Kendrick Lamar on his guest verse on Big Sean's "Control". Lamar touted himself as the king of both coasts and threatened to "murder" the rappers he mentioned, despite being associated with them before. During a performance at a music festival in New York City, Mill sent derogatory messages to Lamar. On September 9, 2013, Mill later released "Ooh, Kill 'Em", a response to Lamar's verse on "Control".In October 2013, Mill instigated an argument on social media with fellow Maybach Music Group artist Wale for not backing him up in his feud with Cassidy, despite the fact that Cassidy had dissed Wale and several others Meek and Wale were affiliated with. He also criticized Wale for not helping him support his second studio album. Two years later their dispute reignited after Wale sided with Drake over Mill during their high-profile feud. The following year, after a long talk with their mentor Rick Ross, Mill and Wale ended their feud and released a duet, "Make It Work", on July 8, 2016.Mill's dispute with AR-Ab ensued after the former's rival, Drake, referenced the latter on his song "Back to Back", saying, "I waited four days, nigga, where y'all at? I drove here in the Wraith playin' AR-Ab." AR-Ab appeared on VladTV in August 2015, said he had not signed to Drake's OVO Sound, and sided with him. He was also disappointed at Mill's response, since he called out AR-Ab on "Wanna Know", the response to Drake's diss track. On August 6, during a performance at the BB&T Pavilion in Camden, New Jersey, Mill responded, "fuck AR-Ab" and questioned his allegiance to an out-of-town rapper. AR-Ab responded by releasing his own version of "Back to Back" on August 8, which disses Mill and also contains violent lyrics threatening to unleash his "shooters" on Mill. In response, Meek's cousin and Dream Chasers signee Omelly released his own version of "Back to Back" that dissed AR-Ab. AR-Ab did another interview on VladTV and said Mill was too scared to respond himself and Omelly was the "softest one on Dream Chasers". He also said he would not respond to Omelly's diss because he was a "worker". In January 2016 AR-Ab revealed that he and Mill had talked it out and their feud was now over.On January 25, 2016, Mill dissed his record label boss Rick Ross's long-time nemesis, 50 Cent, on his extended play, 4/4 (not counting the remix to Drake and Future's "I'm the Plug"). After hearing the EP, 50 Cent replied with a set of over 22 memes, including one where he said that he should run to his girlfriend at the time, Nicki Minaj, and cry to her. Mill disparaged 50 in a direct message, ridiculing his case involving Ross's ex-girlfriend, followed up by his bankruptcy case. On January 30, 2016, Mill dissed 50 again on "War Pain", in the middle of his verse, saying, "My Philly boys will creep up on you when you ain't looking, with your little memes." The next day, 50 and several members of his group, G-Unit, counter-dissed Mill at a concert. The conflict between Mill and 50 also reignited the feud between 50 and Ross.On June 30, 2016, Joe Budden dissed Mill and Drake on "Making a Murderer, Pt. 1", a counter-diss to Drake's "4PM in Calabasas", as well as on his guest verse to French Montana's "No Shopping".


== Personal life ==
Following his release from his three-to-six month prison sentence for probation violation on December 2, 2014, Mill began dating rapper and singer Nicki Minaj in early 2015; he accompanied her as an opening act on her 2015 world tour. On January 2, 2017, it was reported that Mill and Minaj had ended their two-year relationship. Their breakup is detailed on Minaj's 2017 single, "Regret in Your Tears". While shopping in Maxfield in early 2020, Mill was involved in a verbal altercation with Minaj and her husband, Kenneth Petty, before he was escorted out of the store. The issue resulted in a Twitter exchange between Mill and Minaj, highlighting a series of abuse allegations by both parties.Mill has three children. In 2020, Mill's then-girlfriend, Milan Rouge, gave birth to his third child, and her first, on the rapper's 33rd birthday.


== Discography ==

Studio albumsDreams and Nightmares (2012)
Dreams Worth More Than Money (2015)
Wins & Losses (2017)
Championships (2018)
Expensive Pain (2021)Collaborative albums

Too Good to Be True with Rick Ross (2023)


== Tours ==


=== Headlining ===
Dreamchasers Tour (2012)
Motivation Tour (2019)
AfroNation Ghana (2022)


=== Co-headlining ===
Legendary Nights Tour  (with Future) (2019)


== Filmography ==


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
 Media related to Meek Mill at Wikimedia Commons
Official website 
Meek Mill at AllMusicMalcolm James McCormick (January 19, 1992 – September 7, 2018), known professionally as Mac Miller, was an American rapper and record producer. Miller began his career in Pittsburgh's local hip hop scene in 2007, at the age of fifteen. In 2010, he signed a record deal with independent label Rostrum Records and released his breakthrough mixtapes K.I.D.S. (2010) and Best Day Ever (2011). Miller's debut studio album, Blue Slide Park (2011), became the first independently distributed debut album to top the US Billboard 200 since 1995.
In 2013, he founded the record label imprint REMember Music. After his second studio album, Watching Movies with the Sound Off (2013), he left Rostrum and signed with the major label Warner Bros. Records in 2014. With them, he released four studio albums: GO:OD AM (2015), The Divine Feminine (2016), Swimming (2018), and the posthumous Circles (2020). For Swimming, he was posthumously nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Rap Album. Along with recording, he also served as a record producer for himself and other artists under the pseudonym Larry Fisherman.
Miller struggled with addiction and substance abuse, which was often referenced in his lyrics. On September 7, 2018, Miller died from an accidental drug overdose of cocaine, fentanyl, and alcohol at his home, at the age of 26.


== Life and career ==


=== 1992–2010: Early life and career beginnings ===
Malcolm James McCormick was born on January 19, 1992, in the Point Breeze neighborhood of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. He was a son of Karen Meyers, a photographer, and Mark McCormick, an architect, and had an older brother, Miller. His mother is Jewish, and his father is Christian. While he and his brother were raised Jewish, he attended a Catholic grade school to "ensure a good education and a chance to play football and lacrosse." He later went to Winchester Thurston School, and graduated from Taylor Allderdice High School.A self-taught musician, Miller played piano, guitar, drums, and bass by the age of six. He first started rapping at the age of 14. Before that, he wanted to be a singer. In high school, he decided to focus on his rap career, later noting, "Once I hit 15, I got real serious about it and it changed my life completely ... I used to be into sports, play all the sports, go to all the high school parties. But once I found out hip-hop is almost like a job, that's all I did." He originally went by the name Easy Mac (often stylized as EZ Mac) and released the mixtape But My Mackin' Ain't Easy in 2007 at the age of 15. By 2009, he established himself as Mac Miller, and released two mixtapes: The Jukebox: Prelude to Class Clown and The High Life. At the 2010 Pittsburgh Hip Hop Awards, Miller won 21 & Under of the Year, and Best Hip Hop Video for "Live Free".


=== 2010–2013: Breakthrough, Blue Slide Park and Watching Movies with the Sound Off ===
Miller signed with the independent label Rostrum Records in July 2010, in the lead-up to his mixtape K.I.D.S. Rostrum president Benjy Grinberg met Miller while recording with Wiz Khalifa at ID Labs. Although Grinberg started giving Miller advice, he did not show interest in getting involved with his career until Miller began work on K.I.D.S., when he "noticed a maturation in his sound and approach to his music". By that point, Miller had started attracting interest from other record companies, but chose Rostrum due to its location in his hometown and association with Wiz Khalifa. K.I.D.S. was released by Rostrum in August 2010. During this time, Miller broke through with a focus on social media engagement, digital sales, and persistent touring, due to a lack of radio airplay or mainstream features.XXL featured Miller in its annual "Freshman Class" list of 2011, alongside 10 other rappers including Kendrick Lamar and Meek Mill. Miller released his fifth mixtape, Best Day Ever, in March 2011. Its single "Donald Trump" became his first song to chart on the US Billboard Hot 100, peaking at number 75, and received a platinum certification from the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). Also in March 2011, he released a six-track EP, On and On and Beyond. Intended to target a new audience, four of its tracks were previously included on his mixtapes. The EP was his first entry into the US Billboard 200 albums chart at number 55.Miller's debut studio album, Blue Slide Park, released on November 8, 2011. With 144,000 first week sales, it debuted atop the Billboard 200, the first independently distributed debut album to do so since Tha Dogg Pound's Dogg Food in 1995. Three songs from the album, "Smile Back", "Frick Park Market", and "Party on Fifth Ave." charted on the Billboard Hot 100, peaking at number 55, 60, and 64, respectively. Blue Slide Park was certified gold in the United States and Canada. Despite its impressive commercial performance, Blue Slide Park received a generally mixed critical response.
On March 23, 2012, Miller released his seventh mixtape, Macadelic. The single "Loud" peaked at number 53 on the Billboard Hot 100. In mid-2012, Miller premiered two songs produced by Pharrell Williams, from a planned collaboration EP, Pink Slime. At least ten tracks were completed by August 2012 according to Miller, but the project was not released despite a multi-year effort. Miller released an EP, You, under the alias Larry Lovestein & The Velvet Revival on November 21, 2012. Rather than rap, the EP features Miller crooning over lounging jazz instrumentals.
In early 2013, Miller founded the record label imprint REMember Music, named after a deceased friend. The label primarily focused on Pittsburgh artists, as well as releases for Miller's alter-egos. Miller starred in a six-episode reality series, Mac Miller and the Most Dope Family, on MTV2. It followed the production of his upcoming second studio album, and premiered on February 26, 2013. On March 4, 2013, Miller released a mixtape, Run-On Sentences Vol. 1, solely featuring instrumentals made by himself, under his production alias Larry Fisherman. Later that month, Miller featured on singer Ariana Grande's lead single "The Way" for her debut album, Yours Truly; the song is Miller's highest peak on the Billboard Hot 100 at number nine, and was certified triple platinum by the RIAA.His second studio album, Watching Movies with the Sound Off, was released on June 18, 2013. It received generally positive reviews, with most critics praising his new psychedelic sound. The album debuted at number three on the Billboard 200, selling 102,000 copies in its first week. The album spawned three singles; "S.D.S.", "Watching Movies" and "Goosebumpz". The album featured guest appearances from Schoolboy Q, Ab-Soul, Earl Sweatshirt, Tyler, the Creator, Action Bronson and Jay Electronica. According to Miller, the album is "very introspective and very personal so it's kind of throwing it all out there and seeing what happens."Pittsburgh mayor Luke Ravenstahl presented Miller with a key to the city on September 20, 2013, and declared the date "Mac Miller Day". In collaboration with Vince Staples, Miller produced the mixtape Stolen Youth. Under the moniker Delusional Thomas, Miller self-produced and released an eponymous mixtape, Delusional Thomas, on October 31, 2013. On December 17, 2013, Miller released the live album Live from Space, containing nine songs performed with the band The Internet during his Space Migration Tour and five studio-recorded tracks that were cut from his second album.


=== 2014–2018: GO:OD AM, The Divine Feminine, and Swimming ===
Miller parted ways with Rostrum Records when his contract expired in January 2014. On May 11, 2014, Miller independently released his tenth solo mixtape, Faces. Colin Stutz of Billboard wrote that the 24-track mixtape "shows [Miller] introspective, ruminating over his drug use, fame and past." Pitchfork's Craig Jenkins called Faces his "most consistently honest and personal work to date". Miller later reflected on Faces, noting his drug-addled lifestyle while recording it. The second season of Miller's reality series Mac Miller and the Most Dope Family aired on MTV2 in mid-2014.In October 2014, Miller signed a recording contract and distribution deal for REMember Music with the major label Warner Bros. Records. He chose Warner as it was "the most independent thinking" company he met with. Miller's major label debut, GO:OD AM, was released on September 18, 2015. It charted at number four on the Billboard 200, with 87,000 album-equivalent units. The album and the single "Weekend", featuring singer Miguel, were certified gold and platinum by the RIAA, respectively.
Miller began work on his next studio album immediately after completing GO:OD AM, wanting to explore the emotion of love. His fourth studio album, The Divine Feminine, was released on September 16, 2016. The album features Miller singing nearly as much as rapping, and incorporates genres such as R&B, jazz and funk. It received positive reviews, with Pitchfork stating that the album was succinct and refined in its portrayal of love, consequently accentuating Miller's artistry. The Divine Feminine debuted at number two on the Billboard 200 and number one on Billboard's Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums chart with 48,000 units.Miller's fifth studio album, Swimming, was released on August 3, 2018, to positive reviews from critics. Pitchfork described the album as consisting of "wistful soul and warm funk", through his exploration of heartbreak and his own mental health issues. Swimming debuted at number three on the Billboard 200 with 66,000 units, his fifth consecutive top five-charting album release in the United States. Miller's final public performances included an NPR Tiny Desk Concert released August 6, 2018, and a small promotional performance at Hotel Cafe in Hollywood on September 3, 2018, both in support of Swimming. After his death in September 2018, the single "Self Care" rose to number 33 on the Billboard Hot 100, his highest peak as a lead artist at the time. Swimming was nominated for Best Rap Album at the 61st Annual Grammy Awards.


=== Posthumous releases ===
Miller's estate began approving posthumous music releases in June 2019, with the collaborative singles "Time" with Free Nationals and Kali Uchis, and "That's Life" with 88-Keys and Sia. On January 8, 2020, Miller's family announced his first posthumous album, Circles, which was released later that month on January 17. Before his death, Miller had been working on the album as a companion album to Swimming. Production was completed by Jon Brion, who worked with Miller on both albums. Circles debuted at number three on the Billboard 200 with 164,000 units, his biggest week for an album. Its single, "Good News", became his highest-charting song as lead artist, peaking at number 17 on the Billboard Hot 100.On April 29, 2020, his 2010 mixtape K.I.D.S was commercially re-released, followed by a deluxe version on August 13 to celebrate its tenth anniversary, including two previously unreleased songs — "Ayye" and "Back in the Day". Similarly, on October 15, 2021, his 2014 mixtape Faces was also re-released, more than seven years after its initial release. The re-release of his 2011 mixtape I Love Life, Thank You occurred on July 22, 2022. Jazz pianist Robert Glasper released "Therapy Pt. 2", a song featuring Miller's vocals, in October 2022.On March 28, 2023, hip-hop producer Madlib announced via an interview with Sway Universe that he was finishing an album him and Miller were working on years before his passing, whilst confirming that Miller's estate has given clearance for him to release it.


== Artistry ==


=== Musical style and progression ===
Early in his career, Miller's music was widely regarded as "frat rap", with lyrics focusing on partying, smoking marijuana, and lusting after fame, money, and women. After the mixed critical response of Blue Slide Park, Miller began to employ a more expressive and experimental approach to his subsequent releases.Miller experimented with jazz in his career as well. In 2012, Miller released You, an EP featuring lounge-jazz tracks as Larry Lovestein and the Velvet Revival. Speaking about the Larry Lovestein persona, Miller stated "I've kinda have always had this random fantasy of being a seventy-year-old Lounge Jazz singer."Toward the latter half of Miller's career, his music further implemented elements of jazz and additionally branched to funk and R&B. Faces incorporated jazz, while The Divine Feminine and Swimming have both been described by music publications as jazz rap. Rolling Stone writer Danny Schwartz also described Swimming as "spanning rap, funk, and trip-hop."


=== Influences ===
Miller included Big L, Lauryn Hill, Beastie Boys, Outkast, and A Tribe Called Quest among his influences. He had a close relationship with fellow Pittsburgh rapper Wiz Khalifa, saying "Wiz has been a big brother to me with this music thing so far. Our relationship is beyond music. He really is just my homie, whether I will be making music or not." Miller also expressed admiration for John Lennon, he claimed that his background to his iPhone was of Lennon and that he had been a John Lennon fan for a "Long, long, long time". Miller also had multiple tattoos of Lennon, including a tattoo of Lennon's face and a tattoo of John Lennon's song "Imagine".


== Personal life ==
Miller spoke openly about his struggle with substance abuse and depression. To manage stress during his Macadelic Tour in 2012, Miller began taking promethazine, and later became addicted to lean. Miller told Complex in January 2013: "I love lean; it's great. I was not happy and I was on lean very heavy. I was so fucked up all the time it was bad. My friends couldn't even look at me the same. I was lost." He quit taking promethazine in November 2012, before shooting his reality show Mac Miller and the Most Dope Family. In 2014, Miller was taking drugs daily, and felt that the final track on Faces, "Grand Finale", was "supposed to be the last song [he] made on Earth." Recounting that period to Billboard in August 2015, Miller was "definitely way healthier" but not "completely" sober. After stating he "hated" being sober in a February 2016 documentary, Miller had become sober for three months by October 2016, noting his better mood and maintained creativity. However, when asked about his sobriety in April 2017, Miller said he was now "living regularly".Miller was in an on-again, off-again relationship with writer Nomi Leasure, whom he met in middle school, for seven years until 2016. Many of the songs on his mixtape Macadelic were about their relationship. Miller dated singer Ariana Grande from August 2016 to May 2018.


=== Legal issues ===
In February 2011, while on tour in Upstate New York, Miller and his friends were arrested for possession of marijuana for which they spent the night in jail. Miller said the case was "settled".Producer Lord Finesse filed a $10 million lawsuit against Miller, Rostrum Records and DatPiff in July 2012, for the use of a sample of Finesse's song "Hip 2 Da Game" in Miller's 2010 mixtape song "Kool-Aid and Frozen Pizza". In December 2012, the lawsuit was settled out of court with its stipulations kept confidential.In March 2015, the band Aquarian Dream filed a $150,000 lawsuit against Miller for sampling their song "Yesterday (Was So Nice Today)" in the song "Therapy" that appeared on Miller's 2014 mixtape "Faces".Miller was arrested in May 2018 on charges of driving under the influence and hit and run after crashing into a utility pole and fleeing the scene with two passengers. Police obtained his address from his license plate number and Miller confessed when police arrived at his home. He was taken into custody and released on $15,000 bail. In August 2018, Miller was charged with two counts of driving under the influence for the incident. Miller died before his arraignment and the charges were dropped.


== Death ==
On September 7, 2018, Miller was found unresponsive in his Studio City home by his personal assistant, who called 911 and performed CPR until paramedics arrived. Miller was pronounced dead at the scene at 11:51 a.m. (PDT). He had been scheduled to shoot a music video on the day of his death, and was to embark on his Swimming Tour in October. In his will, Miller named his mother, father, and brother as beneficiaries. He was buried at Homewood Cemetery in his hometown of Pittsburgh, in a Jewish funeral. On November 5, 2018, the Los Angeles County Coroner's office determined that Miller died from an accidental drug overdose due to a "mixed drug toxicity" of fentanyl, cocaine, and alcohol.Thousands of fans held a vigil for Miller on September 11, 2018, at Pittsburgh's Blue Slide Park, the inspiration behind his debut album title; the site continues to be a place of remembrance. A tribute concert, Mac Miller: A Celebration of Life, took place on October 31, 2018, at the Greek Theatre in Los Angeles. Many of his friends and collaborators performed or provided messages at the concert; proceeds raised benefited the newly established Mac Miller Circles Fund, which aims to support youth arts and community-building programs in his memory. The charity had raised over $700,000 by January 2019. In May 2019, the renamed Mac Miller Fund issued its first grants, including $50,000 to MusiCares, which was used to launch their Mac Miller Legacy Fund to help young musicians with substance abuse issues.Three men were arrested in September 2019 during an investigation into Miller's death. Cameron James Pettit allegedly sold Miller counterfeit oxycodone pills containing fentanyl two days before his death, which were run to Pettit by Ryan Reavis and supplied by Stephen Walter. Miller had asked Pettit for Percocet, a prescribed painkiller containing oxycodone, in addition to cocaine and Xanax. Investigators believe Miller snorted the laced pills before his death. The three men were indicted on charges of conspiracy and distribution of drugs resulting in death.On April 18, 2022, Reavis was sentenced to ten years in prison for his role in distributing the pills. On May 17, 2022, Walter was sentenced to 17+1⁄2 years in prison for his role.


== Discography ==

Studio albums

Blue Slide Park (2011)
Watching Movies with the Sound Off (2013)
GO:OD AM (2015)
The Divine Feminine (2016)
Swimming (2018)
Circles (2020)


== Filmography ==


== References ==


== External links ==

 
Mac Miller on MTV
Mac Miller at IMDbJarvis Antonio Mills (born September 11, 1983), better known by his stage name Jae Millz, is an American rapper from Harlem, New York, who was signed to T.I.'s record label Grand Hustle Records and Atlantic Records. His debut major label studio album, titled Nothing Is Promised was scheduled for a 2015 release. Millz is noted for participating in rap battles with MCs Murda Mook, E Ness, K-Shine, 40 Cal. and JR Writer.


== Biography ==
Jae Millz was born in Harlem, New York. He started writing lyrics while at junior high school. He followed his love for art and went to the New York High School for Cartoon and Fashion Architecture.Millz grew to local fame by winning hip hop battles and doing performances and releasing a number of mixtapes. In 2003, he released his debut single "No, No, No", which received radio play and peaked at number 89 on the US Billboard Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart. After the success of the song, Millz was offered a record deal with Warner Bros. Records. However, due to creative differences, he left the label, without having an album released. Soon after that he signed with Universal Records. Eventually, he left Universal, too, due to the lack of promotion, as the label was giving priority to other artists.Jae Millz' 2004 single "Streetz Melting" was featured on the soundtrack of the EA video game NBA Live 06.
Millz has released 20 mixtapes since 2004, including Back 2 Tha Future, Zone Out Season and Dead Presidents.
In January 2008, Millz was signed to Young Money Entertainment. He made a cameo appearance in the video for Lil Wayne's single "Lollipop" from Tha Carter III.On December 21, 2009, Millz' collaboration album with Young Money We Are Young Money was released. Millz was featured on eight of the songs, including the singles "Every Girl" and "BedRock". The album landed at number nine on the US Billboard 200, selling 142,000 copies in its first week, and was later certified gold by the RIAA.A debut album, Nothing Is Promised, was scheduled for a 2013 release. In an interview with BBC Radio 1's Tim Westwood, Millz explained that the title refers to his health problems – "The title come from [me] having two seizures in the previous year. I had them in my sleep. It's like you wake up and you don't know what happened." The first single from the album, called "Forever Winning", was released in July 2011 and featured fellow Young Money rapper Lil Wayne. His mixtape Dead Presidents 2 was released on February 4, 2013.On April 19, 2013, Millz released his 20th mixtape Property Of Potentness 2.On November 20, 2020 Millz released the album Wood Panel Walls, which included the single "High Rollers" featuring Anthiny King.On February 12, 2021 Millz released the album, "Much Love" with Anthiny King (distributed through Empire Records), as a continuation of their collaboration.


== Discography ==
Lenox Ave Legend (2017)
Wood Panel Walls (2020)
Much Love (with Anthiny King) (2021)


== References ==


== External links ==
Official websiteShawn Maurice Mims (born March 22, 1981), known  mononymously as Mims (backronym for Music Is My Savior), stylized as MIMS, is an American rapper. Born and raised in New York City, he is best known for his 2006 commercial debut single "This Is Why I'm Hot", which reached number one on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart. Following the success of his hit single, Mims' debut album, Music Is My Savior, was released in March 2007.


== Biography ==
Born into a Jamaican-American family in the Washington Heights neighborhood of New York City, Mims grew up influenced by the rappers from his hometown. Despite the fact that he lost both parents by the time he was 13, Mims focused on music (his mother had given him his first set of DJ equipment shortly before she died) and school to keep himself out of trouble. Though he briefly attended technicals remedial college, Mims decided if he truly wanted to make it as a rapper he needed to focus on what was important to him. After graduating from Westbury High School, he began spending time in Toronto with Wyclef Jean as an acquaintance.
His debut singles, "L.O.V.E/I Made a Vow" were released in 2000, under the temporary pseudonym Mr. Mims. In 2001, he was featured on a Canadian compilation entitled Private Party Collectors Edition Vol. 2, by Baby Blue Soundcrew. His guest appearance on the single "Love 'Em All" alongside Choclair, steadily garnered the rapper some commercial attention in Canada. The music video was nominated for a 2001 MMVA award. Soon after his recognition in Canada, he would gain connections with Blackout Movement. After, he decided to drop the "Mr." from his name and release 2 additional singles under the independent label Push Play Music: "Big-Man Lil-Man/P.I.M.P." (2002) and "I Did You Wrong" (2003). The latter contained a production credit by from the team aforementioned Blackout Movement, who would also produce the rapper's breakout single in 2006, "This Is Why I'm Hot." This would not be enough to finalize a legitimate record deal for the artist. In 2006, he began to record tracks for Latin hip hop label Urban Box Office. He decided that it would be in his best interests to structure his own label situation. He would also create American King Music alongside a few business partners.
While "This Is Why I'm Hot" gradually increased in airplay, the song did well enough on local radio stations, including New York's Power 105.1. It also eventually peaked at atop the US Billboard Hot 100. After a multi-million dollar bidding war, Mims finally signed with the labels EMI and Capitol Records; whom released his major studio debut, Music Is My Savior, in 2007.Mims released his second studio effort on April 7, 2009, titled Guilt. In October 2008, "Move (If You Wanna)" became the first official single from Mims' new album, peaking at #63 on the Hot 100 charts. The second single was released on April 7, 2009, entitled "Love Rollercoaster" featuring LeToya Luckett. In February 2010, Mims appeared alongside KRS-One and Redman on a song entitled "How to Be an Emcee 2010".
Mims' relationship with his record label deteriorated during the making of Guilt, and so after the album's release, he decided to move into the technology field instead of continuing to produce music. Mims collaborated with businessman Erik Mendelson to create an app called RecordGram, which launched in 2016. In 2017, RecordGram won TechCrunch's Startup Battlefield in New York.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===


=== Mixtapes ===
2007: The Future
2008: More Than Meets the Eye
2008: Crazy Shotta
2011: Open Bars
2012: Fuck Yo Feelings


=== Singles ===


=== Guest appearances ===


==== 2001 ====
Baby Blue Soundcrew feat. Choclair and Mims - "Love 'Em All"


==== 2006 ====
Cassie feat. Mims - "Long Way 2 Go" (The Coalition Network Remix)
Lloyd feat. Lil' Wayne and Mims - "You" (The Coalition Network Remix)


==== 2007 ====
Bad Seed feat. Mims - "Daddy"
Bang City feat. Atiba and Mims - "Say Cheese"
Black Heff feat. Mims - "Bottle of Patron"
DJ Nasty feat. Mims, Red Cafe, Pitbull and Currency - "We Really Do This"
Maroon 5 feat. Mims – "Makes Me Wonder" (Stargate Remix)
Enur feat. Natasja Saad and Mims - "Calabria 2007" (Remix)
El Arma Secreta feat. Daddy Yankee and Mims - "Por Eso Estoy Pegao"
Leah Kauffman feat. Mims - "I Like a Boy" (Remix)
Liyah feat. Mims - "Fooled"
Page feat. Mims - "Ballin' Is My Hobby" (Remix)
Prince Ty feat. Mims - "Coulda Woulda Shoulda"
The Untouchable DJ Drastic feat. Mims - "Muthafuckaz"
Willie Joe feat. Mims, Blood Raw and B.o.B - "Get 'Em, Got 'Em" (Remix)


==== 2008 ====
Colin Munroe feat. Izza Kizza & Mims - "What The Young Man Says"
Katy Perry feat. Mims - "I Kissed a Girl" (Remix)
Kylie Minogue feat. Mims - "All I See" (Remix)
Ryan Leslie feat. Mims - "Diamond Girl" (Remix)
Mr. Vegas feat. Mims - "Energy Rock" (Remix)
OB feat. Mims - "Ms. Goodcookie"


==== 2009 ====
Bad Seed feat. Mims and Precious Paris - "Bout My Bread" Produced by YaBoyMartell


==== 2010 ====
Barrington Levy feat. Snoop Dogg and Mims - "Watch Dem (Murderer)"
Jason Derulo feat. Mims - "Cyber Love (Remix)"
KRS-One feat. Redman & Mims - "How To Be An Emcee 2010"


==== 2011 ====
The Grind Kings feat. The Untouchable DJ Drastic and Mims - "The Real in Me"
Mod Sun feat. Mims - "Live Like A Movie"


==== 2012 ====
Timati feat. Mims and Mann - Get Money


== Awards history ==
2001: MuchMusic Video Awards, Best Rap Video, "Love 'Em All" (Nominated)
2007: MTV Video Music Awards, Monster Single of The Year, "This Is Why I'm Hot" (Nominated)
2007: BET Awards, Best New Artist (Nominated)
2007: BET Hip Hop Awards, Rookie of The Year (Nominated)
2007: BET Hip Hop Awards, People's Champ (Nominated)
2007: BET Hip Hop Awards, Best RingTune (Nominated)


== References ==Andrew Aaron Mineo (born April 17, 1988), is an American Christian hip hop artist, producer, music executive, and video director based in New York City. He is signed to Reach Records and his creative initiative Miner League. In addition to his solo work, he is a member of Reach Records' hip hop collective 116 Clique.
Originally from Syracuse, Mineo worked as a producer in high school at Henninger High School in Upstate New York, and joined the hip-hop group Fat Camp, signed to Syracuse University's Marshall Street Records. After moving to New York City, he realized his weak spiritual condition, re-dedicated his life to Christ and closed down his production studio in order to restart his career. He independently released his first mixtape Sin is Wack  in 2009 and joined a community outreach program created by Nicky Cruz called T.R.U.C.E. where he met long-time friends and collaborators Alex Medina, Wordsplayed, Rich Perez and others. Upon meeting, Andy began collaborating with Alex Medina on a record called "Background" that would later be placed on Lecrae's Rehab album and was Andy's introduction to Reach Records.In 2011, Andy released "In My City", a single featuring Efrain from Doubledge, that continued to build momentum and buzz. After rebranding from C-Lite, Andy signed with Reach Records and released, Formerly Known, a full-length studio album, Heroes for Sale on April 16, 2013. On January 28, 2014, he released an EP titled Never Land. His sophomore album, Uncomfortable, was released on September 18, 2015.
Andy began building his own creative initiative, Miner League and signed Wordsplayed along with L.A.-based alternative artist Willow Stephens that featured on his "Strange Motions" track on Uncomfortable. In 2016, the first project from the initiative, Clowntown, was released by Wordsplayed and followed by Willow Stephens' self-titled EP. In 2017, Miner League and Reach Records partnered to release a collaborative mixtape titled, Andy Mineo & Wordsplayed Present Magic & Bird on August 4, 2017.
His video and television work includes "Saturday Morning Car-Tunez", "League Chumps Season 1", and co-direction on numerous of his own music videos. As a producer, his work includes tracks from his self-released "In My City", Formerly Known, Saturday Morning Car-Tunez, and Heroes for Sale. He also produced the single "Destiny" by Sheena Lee, in which he was a featured performer, and, along with rapper Derek Minor, aided DJ Official in producing "Power Trip" by Lecrae, featuring Andy Mineo, Derek Minor, and Sho Baraka, from the album Gravity. Gravity won the Best Gospel Album category in the 2013 Grammy Awards.


== Early life ==
Mineo was raised in a single-parent home in Syracuse, New York. In the summer before entering the 8th grade, Mineo went to a Summer camp at which his sister worked as a counselor and was exposed to the Gospel and his life had changed. However, after his conversion, Mineo went into high school with no Christian support, and he soon drifted away from his faith. While in high school, Mineo acquired recording equipment and started selling studio time out of his home. He had formed a friendship with Chris "Oxburg" Leonard, and the pair recorded a song together in 2001.


== Career ==
After graduating from The City College of New York (CCNY), Mineo, along with Leonard, joined a rap group called Fat Camp, which subsequently won a song contest for WJPZ-FM and signed to Syracuse University's Marshall Street Records. The group opened up for major acts such as Jadakiss, The Roots and Common, as well as members of the underground scene, such as Immortal Technique and Dead Prez, when said artists performed at the University. In 2006, the group recorded and released a studio album entitled The Food.In his first year of college, Mineo met the producer Alex Medina and through him discovered the urban evangelism project T.R.U.C.E. After hearing the song "Price Tag" by Da' T.R.U.T.H., Mineo decided to close his studio and rededicate his life to Christ. He also left Fat Camp, which promptly dissolved. Although he is a Christian, he chooses to not to identify as a "Christian rapper", because he feels the label turns some people off.Following the closure of his studio, Mineo went on tour with T.R.U.C.E. He released his first mixtape, Sin is Wack. Mineo explained in an interview that he came up with the concept of the "Sin is Wack" title through his work with T.R.U.C.E. Following this release, Mineo sang on the Lecrae song "Background" from Rehab in 2010 and "Reverse" from Blacklight by Tedashii in 2011. Mineo explained to Rapzilla "Background" was his first attempt at singing, and following the success of that song he received subsequent requests. The Christian Manifesto claimed that Mineo's hook for "Background" made Rehab one of the best Christian albums to date, and stated that Mineo became one of the most sought after artists, particularly for singing hooks. When asked about his recognition as a singer instead of an emcee, Mineo stated that "I enjoy making melodies", and said he wasn't too concerned about rapping when he supplied hooks for songs and was content with the opportunity to serve in any capacity. Mineo contributed to "Put On" from Captured by Flame and "The Reunion Cypha" on Stop the Funeral by The Ambassador. He released the single "In My City" in 2011 as part of the God in My City Movement prayer walk that Mineo was involved in. The song was reported by Rapzilla to become an "anthem for a lot of people."On July 28, 2011, at Legacy Conference 2011, Reach Records announced that Mineo had signed with the label. Upon signing with the label, Mineo abandoned the stage name C-Lite, stating that he "never really liked the name" and that his signing marked a good time to transition to his legal name. He released his debut mixtape on Reach Records, Formerly Known, on September 29, 2011.
In May 2012, Mineo launched a 4-episode web series entitled Saturday Morning Car-Tunez which featured him remixing classic hip-hop songs. The remixed songs were released as a free download. On July 17, Mineo performed alongside Lecrae at the Apple Store in SoHo, New York to promote Lecrae's 6th studio album, Gravity. In August, Mineo performed in the 2012 God Belongs in My City Concert tour with Anthony Shepherd & The Roar and Sheena Lee. He also headlined the 2012 Kingdom Choice Awards along with Swoope and Bizzle. From the month of October through November, Mineo toured as a member of the 116 Clique on the Unashamed 2012: Come Alive tour. On December 7–8, Mineo was a featured performer at the Kings Dream Conference, a launching of the Kings Dream label by the hip-hop group theBREAX.On January 8, 2013, Mineo announced the release date for Heroes for Sale, April 16, 2013, and released the cover.On January 1, 2014, Mineo announced season two of Saturday Morning Car-Tunez, which showed the making of Mineo's EP, Never Land, which he released on January 28, 2014. Never Land includes "You Can't Stop Me", "Never Land" and "Paisano's Wylin'".On May 19, 2015, he released a single, "Lay Up", featuring New York native Wordsplayed and produced by Alex Medina and Tyshane. In the two weeks before that, he set up a way for fans to text him to receive a private link to the song on SoundCloud.
Andy Mineo revealed the art work for his second full-length album with Reach Records, Uncomfortable, on July 16, 2015. The album was released on September 18, 2015.In 2016, Mineo released a music video for his song "Hear My Heart", which describes his guilt for not learning sign language to communicate with his deaf sister for 25 years. Mineo said he worked for a year to make translate every sound in the song into a three-dimensional experience so that deaf viewers could experience the rhythm of the music.Mineo founded Miner League, a brand he had explained was going to give him new an outlet to make music and expand his reach. Wordsplayed was the first artists signed to the brand. Mineo had experienced a creative halt while writing his upcoming album. He reached out to Wordsplayed, and together they came up with the concept of Magic and Bird, a five-song extended play of songs from Mineo and Wordsplayed. They spent three weeks in Atlanta, Georgia to further develop the project. It grew from a five-song E.P. to a ten-song mixtape with one bonus song and two skits. Mineo and Wordsplayed called their song, "Dunk Contest", a summarization of their time in Atlanta.The pre-release claimed No. 1 on the iTunes' all genres slider. Andy Mineo & Wordsplayed Present Magic & Bird peaked at No. 1 on Top Christian Albums. "The set moved with 11,000 equivalent album units earned in its first week, with 8,000 in traditional sales." said journalist Timothy Yap from Christian music portal Hallels. The mixtape also peaked at No. 3 on Rap Album Sales and No. 23 on Top Rap Albums. "Dunk Contest" entered Spotify's Viral Top 50 in Canada, the United Kingdom, Norway, Australia, New Zealand, Taiwan, Spain, France, and Turkey. On September 21, 2017, Mineo and Wordsplayed launched the Friends and Family Tour.Mineo scored his first RIAA certification when "You Can't Stop Me" went gold on January 17, 2018. The rapper kept the news quiet until he released the remix featuring Messiah on April 11, 2018.
On April 27, 2018, Mineo released an extended play called I: the Arrow. Four days before his EP's scheduled release, Mineo said that he was "unsure [of] when [he] began to feel stuck in this cloud or when it will end, but [he knew] there [were] others who feel the same." He featured the electronic group Weathrman his songs, "Family Photo" and "Anxiety". Mineo revealed that the six-track release is the first of four extended plays culminating into his third studio album. The E.P. peaked at No. 2 on Billboard's Top Christian Albums chart earn 6,000 equivalent album units in its first week.On September 21, 2018, he released another EP, II: The Sword, which is the second of four EPs. The EP, peaked at No. 15 on the Billboard Digital Albums Chart for the week of October 6, 2018.


== Personal life ==
Andy Mineo married Cristina Delgado on August 23, 2014, after their engagement that April.He lived in Washington Heights, and is close friends with his mentors Alex Medina and Rich Perez, who also are frequent artistic collaborators with Mineo. Mineo was a pastor at Christ Crucified Fellowship, of which Perez is head pastor, but with the increasing success of his music career took on the role of deacon instead. Mineo and his wife, Cristina, moved to Atlanta, a location he said is better aligned with his burgeoning music career.


== Discography ==

Heroes for Sale (2013, Reach Records)
Uncomfortable (2015, Reach Records)
Andy Mineo and Wordsplayed Present Magic & Bird (with Wordsplayed) (2017, Reach Records and Miner League)
Never Land II (2021, Reach Records)


== Production discography ==

Fat Camp

The Food – 2006Oxburg

Death Before Dishonor – 2007
Sin Is Wack – 2009
01. "Night of the Living Dead" (featuring Ravi Zacharias)
02. "New Creation"
06. "Who's Watching?"
"In My City" – 2010
Formerly Known– 2011
Saturday Morning Car-Tunez – 2012"Hands High" remix of "Put Your Hands Where My Eyes Could See" by Busta Rhymes – (produced by Courtland Urbano)
"Shut 'Em Down" (featuring Co Campbell) remix of "Ruff Ryders' Anthem" by DMX – (produced by Alex Medina)
"Next Episode" (featuring Sheena Lee) remix of "The Next Episode" by Dr. Dre featuring Snoop Dogg, Kurupt, and Nate Dogg – (produced by James Gabriel)
"Benjamins"  (featuring Rich Perez and Izz) remix of "It's All About the Benjamins(remix)"  by Sean Combs featuring Lil' Kim, The Notorious B.I.G., and The LOX – (produced by Tyshane)Heroes for Sale – 2013
06. "Caught Dreaming" (featuring For King & Country) – with Jeremey S. H. Griffith and J.R. for So Hot Productions
08. "Shallow" (featuring Swoope) – 808 & Elite with additional production by Joseph Prielozny and Andy Mineo
11. "Uno Uno Seis (featuring Lecrae) – Alex Medina with additional production by Andy Mineo
14. "Still Bleeding" (featuring Co Campbell) – With Chris Morgan and additional production by Joseph Prielozny
Never Land – 2014Lecrae

Gravity – 2012
11. "Power Trip" (featuring PRo, Sho Baraka and Andy Mineo) – (DJ Official with additional production from PRo and Andy Mineo)Anomaly – 2014
3. "Say I Won't" (featuring Andy Mineo) – (808xElite and Gawvi with post-production by Andy Mineo)Sheena Lee

Project Destiny – 2012
"Destiny" (featuring Andy Mineo)Tedashii

Below Paradise – 2014
05. Catch Me If You Can (featuring Andy Mineo)
06. "Paradise" (featuring Tauren Wells – With Dre "The Giant" Garcia for Odd Soul Creative


== Videography ==
2010

Andy Mineo - "My City" (co-directed with David Ham)2011

Andy Mineo featuring Sho Baraka - "Fools Gold" (co-directed with Francis De La Torre)2013

Andy Mineo - "Uno Uno Seis" (co-directed with the Craig Brothers)2013

Andy Mineo - "AYO!" (directed and produced - Squint and ORIGN8 Visuals)2015

Andy Mineo - "You Can't Stop Me" (directed Kyle Dettman; Shot by Kyle Dettman and Aaron Craig; Edited by Louis Palacios and Kyle Dettman; VFX: Kyle Dettman) 2016

Andy Mineo - "Hear My Heart" (co-directed with Kyle Dettman; DP by Mick Hawkins) 2017

Andy Mineo, Wordsplayed, Magic & Bird - "KIDZ" (co-directed with Mike Folabi; Edited by Mike Folabi) 
Andy Mineo, Wordsplayed, Magic & Bird - "JUDO" (co-directed with The Craig Brothers) 


== Filmography ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official websiteHugh Anthony Allison (born 1986), better known by his stage name Mr. Muthafuckin' eXquire (often censored as Mr. MFN eXquire or simply eXquire), is an American rapper. Born and raised in Brooklyn, he debuted with the release of his first mixtape, The Big Fat Kill, in 2008. Allison would follow-up with what is considered to be his breakout project, the mixtape Lost in Translation, released by Mishka NYC in 2011. He signed his first major-label record deal with Universal Republic Records, in 2012, which he subsequently left. In 2017, with the release of Allison's fourth EP Brainiac, he launched Chocolate Rabbit, his own record label imprint. His self-titled debut studio album was independently released in 2019.


== Early life ==
Hugh Anthony Allison was born in the Brooklyn borough of New York City in 1986. He grew up in Brooklyn's Crown Heights neighborhood. Since his parents separated at an early age, he spent his weekdays with his mother and weekends with his father. He dropped out of high school at the age of 15.


== Career ==
In 2008, eXquire released his first full-length project, a mixtape titled The Big Fat Kill. He first began gaining major recognition in June 2011, when he released the music video for a song titled "Huzzah". On September 11, 2011, eXquire released his second mixtape, titled Lost in Translation, which features "Huzzah". The mixtape, which was released on Mishka NYC, includes 18-tracks, one of them being the remix to "Huzzah", titled "The Last Huzzah". The remix, which features guest verses from fellow American rappers Despot, Heems, Kool A.D., Danny Brown and El-P, was called one of the best songs of 2011 by Rolling Stone. eXquire's third mixtape, titled Merry eXmas & Suck My Dick, was released on December 25, 2011.On March 15, 2012, it was announced eXquire had signed a recording contract with Universal Republic Records. In November 2012, eXquire released his first major record label project, an EP titled Power & Passion, on Universal Republic. In May 2013, eXquire announced he would release a new project titled Kismet and premiered a song titled "Illest Niggaz Breathin'". In June 2013, he released a 16-track mixtape titled Kismet, which was recorded mostly in Woodstock, New York. In October 2013, eXquire re-released Kismet, re-titling it Kismet: Blue Edition and adding 16 tracks. On October 7, 2013, Universal Republic released eXquire from his contract. On May 13, 2014, he released a song titled "I Ain't Even Fuck Rihanna aka Mr. Lime-A-Rita Papi", in which he details his signing with a major record label and then getting dropped without accomplishing anything.On January 7, 2015, eXquire released Merry eXmas & SMD 2, the sequel to his 2011 Christmas mixtape. On January 8, 2015, eXquire released another mixtape, this one titled Live from the Danger Room, which is compiled of unreleased tracks. On October 8, 2015, eXquire released his second EP, titled Live Forever. On July 12, 2019, eXquire released his self-titled debut studio album.


== Style and influences ==
eXquire has stated that the capital X in his stage name derives from DMX.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===


=== EPs ===


=== Mixtapes ===


=== Singles ===
"360 WAV" (2018)
"Somebody's Sleeping in My Bed" (2019)
"Fck Boy!" (2019)


=== Guest appearances ===


== See also ==
List of hip-hop musicians
List of people from Brooklyn
Music of New York City


== References ==


== External links ==
Mr. Muthafuckin' eXquire at AllMusic
Mr. Muthafuckin' eXquire discography at Discogs
Mr. Muthafuckin' esquire discography at MusicBrainz
Mr. Muthafuckin' eXquire on SoundCloud 
Mr. Muthafuckin' eXquire on Facebook
Mr. Muthafuckin' eXquire on TwitterDavid P. Hobbs (born September 23, 1963), also known by his stage name  Mr. Mixx, is a co-founder of the controversial rap group 2 Live Crew, along with being a scratch DJ and music producer of the group. In 1986, the group released the single "Throw The 'D'"; it is now considered the blueprint of Miami bass.
Later in 1986, 2 Live Crew released their debut album, The 2 Live Crew Is What We Are. The album established the group's signature style of comical sexually explicit lyrics. After a slew of successful releases, the group met with considerable controversy as a U.S. district court ruled the album legally obscene. They were prosecuted but acquitted.
Hobbs produced popular 2 Live Crew singles such as "Throw the D", "Me So Horny", "Hoochie Mama", and other titles in the group's Miami bass musical catalog. Currently, Hobbs continues to DJ and produce other artists


== Early life ==
Hobbs was born on September 23, 1963, and raised in Santa Ana, California.In 1981, Hobbs graduated from Corona High School in nearby Corona, California, and enlisted in the United States Air Force shortly afterward.


== Career ==


=== 1984:  Military service and founding of 2 Live Crew ===
In 1984, while stationed at March Air Force Base near Riverside, California, Hobbs met fellow musicians and United States Air Force Airmen Amazing Vee (Yuri Vielot) and Fresh Kid Ice (Christopher Wong Won). The trio, with Hobbs as DJ and Wong Won and Vielot as rappers, went on to form 2 Live Crew and would perform in small venues near the base, eventually releasing the group's first singles "The Revelation" and "2 Live Beat Box", on their own label independent label Fresh Beat Records, that same year."The Revelation" and "2 Live Beat Box" became popular in Florida, so much so that, following their discharge from the United States Air Force, Hobbs and Wong Won eventually relocated to Miami at the behest of local concert promoter Luther Campbell, who helped cultivate the momentum the group was establishing in the area. Hobbs DJing skills and prowess on the Roland 808 drum machine were instrumental in the group's overall growth.


=== 1985–1986:  Miami Bass DJ and 2 Live Crew success ===
In 1985, 2 Live Crew released their follow up single, "What I Like" on Fresh Beat Records.  That same year, the group entered into a joint venture with Campbell and formed Luke Skyywalker Records. Shortly after forming the record label, Campbell joined 2 Live Crew as a hype man.  In April, 1986, rapper Brother Marquis (Mark D. Ross) joined 2 Live Crew, replacing Vielot, who left the group shortly after its relocation to Miami .
In January 1987, 2 Live Crew released the EP "Throw the D" with "Ghetto Bass" on the B-side, with Hobbs as DJ and producer on both tracks."Throw the D" became an influential  blueprint as to how future Miami bass songs were written and produced. Hobbs' performances on these releases made him the first Miami Bass scratch DJ.The reconfigured group, featuring their most well known lineup (Hobbs, Campbell, Wong Won and Ross) became popular locally and nationally with the release of their Gold-certified debut album, The 2 Live Crew Is What We Are on January 25, 1987.  Notorious for sexually explicit lyrics, the album made Hobbs and his bandmates rap superstars.


=== 1988–1991:  Continued 2 Live Crew success and attendant controversy ===

In 1988, 2 Live Crew released their second album, Move Somethin' It was also certified Gold and featured the singles "Move Somethin'" and "Do Wah Diddy Diddy". The album improved on the charts from the previous album, making in to #68 on the Billboard 200 and #20 on the Top R&B/Hip Hop Albums charts.  A separate ”clean” version of the album, suitable for radio play, was released in addition to the explicit version.
2 Live Crew’s third album As Nasty As They Wanna Be (1989), became the group’s most successful commercial studio album and was certified double Platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America. The album’s lead single "Me So Horny" peaked at 26 of the Billboard Top 100 chart.  A clean version of the album, As Clean As They Wanna Be was released concurrently with the explicit version.
In 1990, the United States District Court for the Southern District of Florida ruled  As Nasty As They Wanna Be to be legally obscene, becoming the first album in history to be so declared by a federal court; this ruling was later overturned by the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit. An obscenity trial followed, where all of the defendants, including Hobbs, were eventually acquitted of all charges.
In late 1990, following the verdict in the obscenity trial, 2 Live Crew released their fourth studio album, Banned in the U.S.A.. The album included the hits "Do the Bart" and the title track which peaked at 20 on the Billboard Top 100 chart. The eponymous title single referred to the earlier federal court obscenity ruling regarding the group's previous album As Nasty As They Wanna Be.  Bruce Springsteen granted the group permission to interpolate his song "Born in the U.S.A." for the single. Banned in the U.S.A. was also the first album to bear the RIAA-standard Parental Advisory warning sticker.Live in Concert, 2 Live Crew's fifth album and only live album, was also released in 1990. The album peaked at number 46 on the Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums chart.Sports Weekend: As Nasty as They Wanna Be, Pt. 2, featuring the single "Pop That Coochie," which reached 58 on the Hot 100 chart, was released by 2 Live Crew in 1991. The group's sixth album was a sequel of sorts to As Nasty As They Wanna Be, and was also accompanied by a clean version, Sports Weekend: As Clean As They Wanna Be, Pt. 2.
Sports Weekend: As Nasty as They Wanna Be, Pt. 2 would be the last studio album to include all of the most well known members of the group, Hobbs, Wong Won, Ross, and Campbell.


=== 1993–1999:  Final albums with the most well known 2 Live crew line up, solo projects and 2 Live Crew reunion ===
In 1994, Hobbs formed a group, Mr. Mixx and Da Roughneck Posse, which released the studio album One Monkey Don't Stop No Show. That same year, with a group called Bass Poets, Hobbs released the album Bass-Boom-Booty.In 1995, Hobbs, Wong Won, and Ross reunited to release the single "Hoochie Mama" for the soundtrack of the popular 1995 movie Friday. The soundtrack reached No. 1 on the Billboard 200 chart, where it held its position for two weeks, and remained on the Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums chart for six weeks.
Also in 1995, Hobbs teamed up with producer Billy Vidal to release several Miami Bass compilations from 1995 through 1997.In 1996, Hobbs again reunited with Wong Won and Ross as the 2 Live Crew, to perform, produce and release the group's seventh studio album Shake a Lil' Somethin' whose hit song of the same name, peaked at #72 on the Top 100 chart and #11 on the Hot Rap Songs|Hot Rap Singles chart. Two of the album's singles charted:  "Do the Damn Thing", which made it to #24 on the Hot Rap Singles chart, and "Be My Private Dancer", which peaked at #34. Shake A Lil' Somethin' would be the last 2 Live Crew album to feature Hobbs.
In 1998, Hobbs released his first solo album The Sex Files.


=== 2000-present: Solo albums and current projects ===
In 2002, Hobbs released his second solo studio album Nasty Controversial & Unauthorized Part 1.In 2005, Hobbs released his third solo album Vgnl Minded on his own independent label, Mr. Mixx Recordings.From 2008 to 2011, Hobbs created and ran his own website, Collegepeepshowtv.com.In 2009, Hobbs released his fourth solo album The Money And The Booty .In 2010, Hobbs briefly reunited with former bandmates Wong Won, Ross, and Campbell as 2 Live Crew, and were honored at the 2010 VH1 Hip-Hop Honors: The Dirty South Edition awards show where they also performed.In 2016, Hobbs reunited with Ross to reform 2 Live Crew shortly before Wong Won's death in 2017.  The duo subsequently released two singles How Bout Dem Cowboys (2016) and One Horse Sleigh (2016), and continue to tour nationally as 2 Live Crew.Hobbs also currently tours nationally with Afroman as his tour DJ, and continues to work with and produce other hip hop artists.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official Myspace Page
2016 Red Bull Music Academy article/interview: "2 Live Crew’s DJ and Producer Mr. Mixx On the Roots of Miami Bass"
https://www.mixxintl.com/
https://www.mixcloud.com/MRMIXX808/
https://distrokid.com/hyperfollow/beatsbymixxanddjdmc/dwWtOsten S. Harvey Jr. (born December 8, 1965), better known by his stage name Easy Mo Bee, is an American hip hop and R&B record producer and DJ, known for his production work for artists such as Big Daddy Kane and Miles Davis, as well as his affiliation with Bad Boy Records in its early years, and his production involvement in The Notorious B.I.G.'s debut album, Ready to Die.  He also produced two songs on 2Pac's album, Me Against the World.


== Biography ==


=== Early career ===
Easy Mo Bee was born in Bedford–Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, New York City, and raised in the neighborhood's Lafayette Gardens projects. He began producing after hearing music by Ced Gee of Ultramagnetic MCs and Marley Marl, producer of early hip-hop hits for the Juice Crew and LL Cool J. His first production placement came on Big Daddy Kane's breakthrough album, It's a Big Daddy Thing, after which he was approached to work with another Cold Chillin' Records artist, The Genius — an early alias for Wu-Tang Clan co-founder GZA. Mo Bee produced the majority of the rapper's debut album, Words From the Genius, as well as produced "Sexcapades", a track that featured on the B-side of fellow future Wu-Tang co-founder RZA's first single, "Ooh I Love You Rakeem", which the rapper/producer released under the alias Prince Rakeem.Around that same time, Mo Bee had a group with neighborhood friends A.B. Money and J.R. called Rappin' Is Fundamental.  The trio released only one album on A&M Records in 1991: The Doo-Hop Legacy. Jazz pioneer Miles Davis approached the young producer to help fuse jazz and hip-hop. These sessions would become his last studio album, 1992's Doo-Bop. The project, released posthumously after Davis died during the recording process, leaving the project unfinished, garnered generally mixed reviews.


=== 1990s ===
Mo Bee first linked up with Sean Combs' Bad Boy Entertainment in 1993, when he produced the first single for Combs' up-and-coming artist, the Notorious B.I.G., "Party and Bullshit". Easy also went on to produce much of the label's two flagship releases: Project: Funk da World by Craig Mack, and Ready to Die by B.I.G. Additionally, Mo Bee produced the "Flava in Ya Ear (Remix)," a driving single for both projects, featuring Craig Mack, Biggie, Busta Rhymes, Rampage and LL Cool J.In 1994 and 1995, Mo Bee was also associated with 2Pac, having produced songs for both, including one called "Runnin' From tha Police," featuring both Pac and B.I.G. as well as rapper/producer Stretch and 2Pac's crew Dramacydal. In addition to featuring 2Pac and B.I.G. on the same record, the song is notable for inventive production techniques he described in an interview with HipHopDX. "There’s a bassline in the original version. Go back and listen to that record. I played the bassline live all the way through that record from the SP-1200 through multi-pitch. It was like a bass guitar strumming, and if I messed up, it was like 'Yo bring it back, and plug me in.'"Mo Bee went on to produce two songs for Pac's 1995 album Me Against the World, although the two recorded several other songs that did not make the cut. During this time period, he also crafted moderate radio hits for the Lost Boyz ("Jeeps, Lex Coups, Bimaz & Benz"); Das EFX ("Microphone Master"); and Busta Rhymes ("Everything Remains Raw").


=== Later career ===
In 1997, Mo Bee produced for Biggie's double-disc album, Life After Death. The producer crafted two songs, "I Love the Dough" and "Going Back to Cali"; these songs would mark the last time Easy would produce for Bad Boy.
In 2000, he put out an album called Now or Never: Oddysey 2000, featuring East Coast staples Busta Rhymes, Raekwon, Prodigy, Smif-N-Wessun, Kool G Rap, and Sauce Money, along with Goodie Mob and Kurupt. Over the next decade he would craft songs for Big Daddy Kane, Ras Kass, the Wu-Tang Clan, Mos Def, Black Rob, Sean Price, Wiz Khalifa and others, eventually winning a Grammy for his work with Alicia Keys on her album, The Diary of Alicia Keys (2003).


== Discography ==

Studio albumsTwo for One (with Emskee) (2015)
This Is My Life (with Big D) (2019)
Now or Never: Odyssey 2000 (2000)with Rappin' Is FundamentalThe Doo-Hop Legacy (1991)Instrumental albums...And You Don't Stop! (2015)


== References ==


== External links ==
Discogs.com - Easy Mo Bee discographyTroy Donald Jamerson (born October 31, 1972), better known by his stage name Pharoahe Monch, is an American rapper known for his complex lyrics, intricate delivery, and internal and multisyllabic rhyme schemes.


== Biography ==
Monch released three albums as part of the rap duo Organized Konfusion with partner Prince Poetry: The self-titled Organized Konfusion, Stress: The Extinction Agenda and The Equinox. The duo handled a large amount of production on these albums themselves. All albums received positive critical reviews, but moderate sales. As a result, the duo split up after recording their final album The Equinox in 1997. Prince Poetry has since denied the possibility of an Organized Konfusion reunion.Pharoahe Monch then signed to Rawkus Records, an indie label. After making several guest appearances on albums like the best-selling Rawkus compilation Soundbombing II, Monch's much-hyped debut, Internal Affairs was released in 1999. The first single of the album, "Simon Says", became a hit single, peaking at No. 97 on the Billboard Hot 100. Despite its success, the song caused controversy when Monch was later sued for its unauthorized use of a sample from Akira Ifukube's Gojira Tai Mosura, the theme song to the 1992 film Godzilla vs. Mothra. This resulted in a halting in his album's distribution.
Following the controversy, Pharoahe would not release another solo project for several years, but still released some songs and had guest appearances. In 2000, he collaborated with Mos Def and Nate Dogg on the hit song "Oh No" from the Rawkus compilation record Lyricist Lounge 2. He contributed the song "Fuck You" to the Training Day soundtrack in 2001, and rapped the theme song to Madden NFL 2002. He also provided vocals on the track "Last Dayz" on the 2001 Adam F Album Kaos: The Anti-Acoustic Warfare and remixes of the track on the follow-up Drum & Bass Warfare, released the following year. In 2003 Pharoahe released his final single through Rawkus Records, "Agent Orange", a war inspired song which revisited the 1991 Organized Konfusion track "Releasing Hypnotical Gases".
There were rumors his next album, at first tentatively titled Innervisions, was to be released under Denaun Porter's new Shady Records imprint Runyon Ave. They reached out to Stevie Wonder and were at the beginning processes of recording the album  but apparently the deal fell through; Monch later announced a deal with Street Records Corporation, home of Wu-Tang Clan, David Banner and Terror Squad. On December 19, 2006, Pharoahe Monch released his first and only official mixtape, The Awakening, hosted by Clinton Sparks, DJ Boogie Brown. In June 2007, Monch released his second solo album Desire to critical acclaim. Monch said about the album; "...it's very soulful, very gospel, a fresh, new sound for me." The album's lead single was the self-produced track "Push", with "Let's Go" as its B-side. The song's music video and single were released in late September 2006. Pharoahe Monch released a second music video entitled "When the Gun Draws" at a Brooklyn music festival in February 2007. The track was inspired by a song he did with Prince Po entitled "Stray Bullet" which was featured on the Stress: The Extinction Agenda album. A final video was made for the title track "Desire" in late 2007. It was directed by New Zealand director Andy Morton and shot on the Rock the Bells tour with full band. The video features both MeLa Machinko and Showtyme.
On July 9, 2009, Pharoahe Monch allowed hip hop website HipHopDX.com to leak a song from his forthcoming album W.A.R. (We Are Renegades). The song was called "Shine" and featured vocals by MeLa Machinko and was also produced by Diamond D. On February 14, 2010, another song from Monch was leaked, which is called "Clap (One Day)," produced by M-Phazes.
Pharoahe Monch released his third solo album W.A.R. (We Are Renegades) in March 2011. It featured guest appearances from Jill Scott, Styles P, Citizen Cope, Jean Grae, Royce da 5'9", Immortal Technique, Vernon Reid, Phonte, Mr. Porter, Mela Machinko, Showtyme & DJ Boogie Blind. Pharoahe revealed that the album is a "throwback to 1993, '94 hip-hop" and featured production by Exile, Marco Polo, M-Phazes, Fatin, Diamond D, Mike Loe, Samiyam, Adam Deitch, Eric Krasno and Pharoahe Monch himself.  Four singles have been released from the album: "Shine", "Clap (One Day)", "Black Hand Side", and "Assassins".  A ten-year anniversary re-issue of Internal Affairs will also be released featuring a documentary about the making of the album.In 2011, Pharoahe Monch was a judge on the Ultimate MC TV show alongside Royce da 5'9", Sean Price, Planet Asia, and Organik.Pharoahe Monch recently made his second appearance on an R&B song - the first being "It Ain't The Money" on Macy Gray's 2003 album The Trouble With Being Myself -  performing on Eric Roberson's album track "The Cycle" from Roberson's 2014 album The Box.Pharoahe released his fourth album, PTSD: Post Traumatic Stress Disorder, on April 15, 2014, under his independent label, W.A.R. Media. The album is a conceptual follow up to his third album, W.A.R. (We Are Renegades). The album featured two singles, "Damage" and "Bad M.F.", both produced by Lee Stone.
In late 2017 Pharoahe Monch was featured in a song by Keyon Harrold titled "Her Beauty Through My Eyes" from Keyon's latest album Mugician.
In 2019, Pharoahe formed the rap-rock supergroup th1rt3en, featuring guitarist Marcus Machado and drummer Daru Jones; releasing their debut single "Palindrome" in September 2019. On October 19, 2019, Internal Affairs was finally released to streaming services, on its 20th anniversary.Th1rt3en's debut album A Magnificent Day for an Exorcism was released two years later on January 22, 2021, and was supported by the three singles "Fight" featuring rap group Cypress Hill, "666 (Three Six Word Stories)" and "Cult 45".


== Rapping technique ==
Pharoahe Monch is acclaimed for his complex rapping technique; AllMusic says he has, "a reputation as one of underground hip hop's pre-eminent lyricists, crafting intricate and intelligent raps." Kool Moe Dee ranks him at 26 in his best MCs of all-time list, from his book, There's a God on the Mic, noting: "Pharoahe Monch is like an eloquent linguistics professor moonlighting as a rhyme serial killer terrorist, challenging the listeners' I.Q. while daring him or her to keep up."Having been afflicted with chronic asthma since the age of thirteen months, Monch developed new and creative ways to deliver his lyrics when rapping. In an interview with HipHopDX, he stated that "asthma forced [him] to really go against the issue and push the envelope in terms of breath control," developing a technique he "wouldn't try if [he] didn’t have asthma."Monch compares writing and recording his lyrics to writing and filming a movie - in the book How to Rap he says he will 'punch-in' vocals so he can "retake some things, just like a film", and he 'rewrites' lyrics, saying he will "go back as a screenwriter and rewrite scenes and leave more to the imagination."For his biggest hit, "Simon Says", he comments that he wrote the choruses before he wrote the verses, and fellow rapper and collaborator O.C. notes that Monch will write single lines down and then use them five years later. His vocal delivery is inspired by Jazz music and musicians such as John Coltrane.


== Discography ==


=== Solo albums ===
Internal Affairs (1999)
Desire (2007)
W.A.R. (We Are Renegades) (2011)
PTSD: Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (2014)


=== Group albums ===
Organized Konfusion (1991) (with Prince Po as Organized Konfusion)
Stress: The Extinction Agenda (1994) (with Prince Po as Organized Konfusion)
The Equinox (1997) (with Prince Po as Organized Konfusion)
A Magnificent Day for an Exorcism (2021) (with th1rt3en)


== References ==


== External links ==
Official websiteKarim Kharbouch (Arabic: كريم خربوش [kæɾiːm χɑɾbuːʃ]; born November 9, 1984), better known by his stage name French Montana, is a Moroccan-American rapper. Born and raised in Morocco, he immigrated to the United States with his family at the age of 13. He embarked on a musical career in 2002, releasing a slew of independent material until signing a joint-venture record deal with Puff Daddy's Bad Boy Records and Rick Ross's Maybach Music Group in 2012.
Kharbouch released his debut mixtape in 2007 and had his first breakthrough with the single "Choppa Choppa Down" in 2010. He released his debut studio album Excuse My French in May 2013, which was met with generally mixed reviews despite commercial success from its lead single, "Pop That" (featuring Rick Ross, Drake, and Lil Wayne). In July 2017, he released his second studio album Jungle Rules, which peaked at number three on the Billboard 200. The album was preceded by the hit single "Unforgettable" (featuring Swae Lee), which became Montana's first song as lead artist to reach the top 10 on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100, also becoming diamond certified by the RIAA. His third and fourth studio albums, Montana (2019) and They Got Amnesia (2021) were released to lukewarm commercial and critical response.French Montana has founded the record label Coke Boys Records (previously known as Cocaine City Records) in 2008, and has signed Chicago rapper Lil Durk, fellow New York artists including Velous, the late Chinx, and record producer Harry Fraud. He is the most streamed African-born musical artist, and is the first African-born artist to have a RIAA certified diamond song. Outside of music, French Montana has been prolific in charitable and philanthropic endeavors.


== Early life ==
Karim Kharbouch was born on November 9, 1984, in Casablanca, Morocco. He grew up at the family estate outside Casablanca where he lived for the first 13 years of his life. Growing up, he was consumed with soccer and rap, describing them as his two favorite childhood hobbies, before getting into basketball in his later teens.In the mid-1990s, Kharbouch left Morocco with his parents and younger brother for New York City, where they settled in the South Bronx. Kharbouch spoke only his native languages of Moroccan Darija Arabic and French when he first arrived, and learned English in the streets and in the Bronx high schools of Roosevelt and Lehman. After struggling for two years, his father decided they would move back to Casablanca, but his mother opted to stay back with their children citing lack of opportunities back home. His mother was pregnant with his youngest brother at the time, who was born in the United States shortly after his father departed for Morocco. With three children, his mother was dependent on welfare for financial support. Kharbouch eventually found himself the primary breadwinner for the family.


== Career ==


=== 2002–2010: Cocaine City Records ===
French Montana began his career as a battle rapper in his teens under the name Young French. In 2002, French and close friend Cams created a series of street DVDs called Cocaine City, drawing inspiration from the Smack DVD series popular at the time. The series featured interviews with major and upcoming rappers, personalities, and a focus on street music and hip hop beefs. Initially as Young French, he used the DVDs as a means of showcasing his talent as an underground artist, including in it his own original music, freestyles, and collaborations with other artists. The first volume in the series featured Pee Wee Kirkland and Remy Ma among others. What started out as a medium for developing an audience, quickly grew into one of the top-selling street DVDs. The series ran for eight years between 2002 and 2010, totaling 14 volumes, and multiple spinoff films. Based out of the Bronx, French ran the series with the help of childhood friends including Brock, Droop Pop and Cheeze, who went on to become the first rappers that formed the Coke Boys.In 2003, French suffered a gunshot to the head when he was confronted by two armed gunmen as he was leaving a recording studio in the Bronx. The incident resulted in one of the gunmen dead, in what is believed to be a case of "friendly fire" by one assailant against the other. French was then hospitalized for several weeks. Upon discharge, he discovered that he was set up by someone close to him and his circle.In 2007, French Montana released his debut mixtape French Revolution Vol. 1, which included collaborations with Uncle Murda, Jae Millz, Mazaradi Fox and Tony Yayo. The track "Quarter to Eight" was the first of many collaborations with Rick Ross. The J.Cardim-produced "Straight Cash" was French's first underground hit. In 2008, he released his second mixtape, Live From Africa. The song "Waavvy" was the first collaboration with rapper Max B.
French Montana and Max B released their debut collaborative mixtape Coke Wave on February 6, 2009. A few weeks later, on February 23, Max B's mixtape Quarantine was released, while French released his The Laundry Man on February 24, 2009. The two artists resumed concentrating on their solo records, until the release of their second collaborative mixtape Coke Wave 2 in November that year.
French was included in XXL's Freshman Class of 2012. At that time he had already been signed to Bad Boy Records following the success of his single "Shot Caller", and had just signed a joint-venture between Bad Boy and Maybach Music Group.


==== Harry Fraud and the Chinatown raid ====
In an interview with Rolling Stone magazine, close friend and producer Harry Fraud revealed first meeting French Montana during a recording session at a studio in Chinatown. Fraud recalls recording a song for someone which French happened to have a guest feature on. In an unusual turn of events, the building was raided by police after a tip-off that there were counterfeit Gucci and Louis Vuitton purses being manufactured at the same building. Having lost his studio spot, Fraud went on to form his own studio in Brooklyn, where the two "met and formed a bond".Harry Fraud, who hails from a musical family background and had interned at a recording studio, was still unknown professionally at the time. The two released their first collaboration "New York Minute", featuring Jadakiss, off of French's fifth mixtape Mac Wit Da Cheese released on April 19, 2009. Following its success, the two artists recorded "We Playin In The Wind" off of French's sixth mixtape The Laundry Man 2 released on June 29. With "New York Minute" still buzzing in the city, rapper Ma$e would approach French Montana to hop on the remix, included in French's eighth mixtape Coke Wave 2 released in November. Since then, Harry Fraud's production has been a staple among French's music, and Fraud has since ventured out into working with various other artists. Fraud gained mainstream attention when his track with French Montana "Shot Caller" became one of the most added tracks on urban contemporary radio in 2011–2012.


==== Gaby Acevedo and signing with Akon ====
Starting in 2009, French Montana had signed a deal with Akon and his Konvict Music label. The two previously met in Miami in 2008, and later appeared on DJ Green Lantern's "Invasion Radio" on SiriusXM's Hip-Hop Nation. The pair collaborated on a series of tracks including their first single "Married to the Streets" on French's seventh mixtape Cocaine Konvicts released on September 25. In later interviews, French revealed that he had a "shopping deal" with Akon for a six months to a year period. "A shopping deal is when an artist takes a liking in you, and they try to take you to a label to get you signed. I was gonna go get signed to his label, but they were going through problems with Interscope. [As a result] my deal was over with him, so I went and did my own thing", claimed French in his 2012 interview with Complex. Akon, whom French refers to as "big brother", would continue to maintain a relationship with French, collaborating on songs together despite the unsuccessful deal between the two.
French had met Akon through their mutual friend Gaby Acevedo. Acevedo was then-president of SRC Records – under founder and chairman Steve Rifkind — the label first responsible for breaking out artists such as Akon, David Banner, and Remy Ma, then a member of Fat Joe's Terror Squad. Acevedo, whom French had befriended during his time working on the Cocaine City DVDs, had put his music on to Akon who then approached French inviting him to meet him in Florida. Although the Akon deal was short-lived, Acevedo would eventually go on to become French's manager following his mainstream breakout. In 2012, with Rifkind leaving SRC's parent company Universal Music Group in September, the SRC imprint would close shop as well. With French's management deal with Mizay Entertainment having recently ended, Gaby Acevedo would postpone retirement to become his new manager, where he now spends his time on the road touring with French.


=== 2010–2011: "Choppa Choppa Down" and southern breakout ===
French released his tenth mixtape Coke Boys on September 15, 2010, which included collaborations with Three 6 Mafia, Gucci Mane, Akon, Fat Joe, fellow Coke Boys, among others. The record which included the track "Choppa Choppa Down", featuring Waka Flocka Flame, became a hit among clubs and radio throughout the south. Waka Flocka, who recently broken into the mainstream with his single "Hard In Da Paint" released on May 13, had recorded the song earlier that year while Gucci Mane was still in prison. An early remix to the song, featuring French Montana, was included in French's ninth mixtape Mac & Cheese 2 released earlier that year on May 6 and which also included collaborations with rising stars Wiz Khalifa, Nicki Minaj, Big Sean, Curren$y and Nipsey Hussle among others. The two respective breakout tracks would kick off the start of a close relationship between French and Waka Flocka, where the two describe themselves as being "brothers".


==== Signing with Debra Antney ====
On November 18, 2010, XXL magazine reported on French Montana having signed with Atlanta-based management firm Mizay Entertainment, headed by Debra Antney. Debra, who is Waka Flocka's mother, was also manager to Gucci Mane, OJ Da Juiceman, rising star Lex Luger and the 808 Mafia production team, and formerly Nicki Minaj prior to her mainstream breakout. The music video for "Choppa Choppa Down", which featured a Black Hawk Down theme, was released in late-January and included cameos from Gucci, Shawty Lo, DJ Holiday and members of Brick Squad Monopoly. With the success of the Coke Boys mixtape and his recent management deal with Debra, French adopted a recurring trap influence among his music. in 2013, Debra Antney sued French Montana for dealing behind her back for commission. In 2017, Debra won the lawsuit against him for which he was obliged to pay $2 million to Debra.On February 15, French released his eleventh mixtape Mister 16: Casino Life, which featured productions from Fraud and Lex Luger among others, including his soon-to-be next hit "Shot Caller". The tape's combination of hard trap beats alongside the more soulful beats – such as those of his New York producer Harry Fraud – would become a fixture among French's music. The latter sound being further explored in his twelfth mixtape Coke Boys 2 released on August 19, providing a softer break from his more robust tapes that year. Both records have been acclaimed for their production and hooks. French would continue on his increasing presence in the South, releasing his collaborative mixtape with Waka Flocka called Lock Out on December 14. That same month, he would release his long-awaited collaborative mixtape Cocaine Mafia with Memphis-based rappers Juicy J and Project Pat, released on December 19. This would be French's thirteenth and fourteenth mixtapes, respectively. With four records out in 2011, it would be his busiest year of releases since 2009. In a 2012 interview with Parlé magazine, French revealed his deal with Mizay Entertainment as having been for a year and a half.


==== Collaborating with Rick Ross ====
With French's growing buzz in the South, he was approached by Florida-based rapper Rick Ross who invited him to his studio. French, who admits having been a fan of Ross' music, was invited to come "at like three in the morning" where he listened to his upcoming MMG collaborative album Self Made Vol. 1. The two recorded a track for the album, while Ross hopped on the remix to "Choppa Choppa Down". The new single, which also featured Wiz Khalifa, was released on April 28, 2011, with the music video coming out in June. An earlier remix featuring Gucci Mane and Wiz Khalifa had been released on March 25. The collaboration would mark the start of French's relationship with Rick Ross and his Maybach Music Group, prompting speculation whether French would be signing to the label.


=== 2011–2012: "Shot Caller" and New York takeover ===
With French juggling between Atlanta and New York, his song "Shot Caller" off of the Casino Life record would gain traction on New York radio beginning mid-2011. During an on-air interview with Fat Joe on DJ Green Lantern's "Invasion Radio" in October 2011, French would call in to praise close friend and fellow-Bronx rapper Fat Joe, revealing his role in helping to get "Shot Caller" on the airwaves. Fat Joe, whom he refers to as "big brother", praised French's work ethic and revealed that French had been receiving offers from several major labels.


==== Jim Jones bottle-throwing incident ====
On the night of August 5, 2011, Bronx-based rapper Fat Joe was slated to host Funkmaster Flex's birthday party at Webster Hall. During his performance, Fat Joe brought out French Montana to perform on stage. Controversy erupted as Jim Jones and his entourage, who were reportedly on the adjacent balcony seats, began hurling bottles and glass at the performers. The following day, videos of the incident were uploaded online, depicting French and his entourage facing a barrage of glass and liquor on stage, as they continued performing his rendition of "Hard In Da Paint" while facing the mentioned balcony with the crowd chanting along to it. Some of the members on stage hurled debris back towards the balcony, as Jones and his entourage eventually exited the premises.


==== Collaborating with Diddy ====
Fat Joe and Waka Flocka accompanied French Montana in his video shoot for "Shot Caller" later that month in August. The song, which made reference to Diddy's 1997 hit "Its All About The Benjamins", would soon garner the interest of the Bad Boy mogul. On October 9, French announced Diddy and T.I. for the official remix to the song. DJ Drama, who called it his favorite record, referred T.I. to jump on the remix. Although the T.I. feature never came to fruition, the remix was released on November 24, and featured rappers Diddy and Rick Ross.
With "Shot Caller" already one of the most played tracks on New York radio, on stations such as Hot 97 and Power 105, French was slated to appear on the upcoming episode of BET's 106 & Park on December 6, where he would be debuting the music video and announcing the label he's signing with. Diddy would also appear that night as part of his "Bad Boy Takeover" campaign, whereon the two officially announced that French Montana had signed to Bad Boy Records. Between 2011 and 2012, "Shot Caller" had become one of the most added tracks on urban contemporary radio in the country. It was re-released as a single on January 10, and the music video for the remix was released in February 2012. A "NY Giants remix" premiered on Funkmaster Flex's radio show on January 6, celebrating the Giants' Super Bowl win against the Patriots the day before.


=== 2012–2016: Signing to Bad Boy and MMG ===

Having received offers from several labels, including Jay-Z's Roc Nation and Kanye's GOOD Music; on December 6 on BET, French Montana publicly announced signing with Bad Boy Records, an imprint of Interscope Records. In a subsequent interview with Billboard magazine, French revealed that had he not signed with Bad Boy that MMG would be his next choice. However, on January 4, 2012, while in the studio with Rick Ross, the two announced French's new signing to a joint-venture between Bad Boy Records and Maybach Music Group, making him a part of both labels. Both Ross and Diddy would be executive producing his debut studio album.


==== "Stay Schemin" and "Pop That" ====
On January 6, the two dropped Ross' track "Stay Schemin" with rapper Drake. Notable for its memorable French and Ross "hook", the track became one of the biggest hits that year, oft-talked about for its Drake verse believed to be a "diss" towards rapper Common at the time. French Montana was featured on XXL's Freshman Class of 2012 alongside Future, Kid Ink, Danny Brown, Macklemore, Don Trip, Hopsin, Iggy Azalea, Roscoe Dash, and Bad Boy labelmate MGK. French later revealed to host Sway Calloway on MTV's RapFix Live in August 2012 that he almost turned down the cover opportunity feeling he deserved it a year or two prior.French's first single from the upcoming album, "Pop That" was released on June 15, featuring Ross, Drake and Lil Wayne. The song would be one of the biggest hits that year, and a still-popular club and summer anthem since. It is French's most successful commercial single, having been certified "platinum" by the RIAA, and peaking at #2 on Billboard's Hot R&B and Rap charts and #36 on the Hot 100. While initially expected for a release in July 2012, French's album went through several pushbacks until its finalized release date of May 21, 2013. The date which happened to coincide with the birthdays of Max B and famous labelmate the late Notorious B.I.G. In the meantime, French had released his fifteenth mixtape Coke Boys 3 on April 13, 2012, which included collaborations with fellow Coke Boys Chinx Drugz and Cheeze, alongside the likes of Ross, Akon, Kevin Gates and Wale. Notable tracks among others include, a rare collaboration between French, Chinx and the late Stack Bundles on "Tap That", and "Headquarters" featuring Red Café and Chinx, the music video for which premiered on July 21.


==== The Homecoming and Mac & Cheese 3 ====
In September 2012, French Montana was featured on the cover of the 82nd issue of The Fader magazine, who joined French on his first homecoming to Morocco after seventeen years since his family moved to the United States in 1996. The article describes his journey through Morocco, meeting his mother's family, and eventually his estranged father who is not made aware of his son's coming arrival. French was accompanied by manager Gaby Acevedo, and youngest brother Ayoub, in addition to Zach Baron and Michael Schmelling of The Fader. The piece ends with an emotional reunion between the father and the two sons, including Ayoub who had previously never met their father before.French marked the end of the year with his sixteenth mixtape Mac & Cheese 3 released on November 20, 2012. which included collaborations with Prodigy, Fabolous, Future, Fat Joe, Ma$e, Rico Love and Trina among others. Acclaimed for its production and track selection, it was among the most downloaded mixtapes of all time. With several productions from Young Chop, the music video to "Devil Wants My Soul" premiered on November 5, and an in-studio video of "Ocho Cinco" on November 26. Both songs would go viral, prompting another music video for "Ocho Cinco" – featuring Diddy, MGK, Red Café and King Los – released in February 2013. The song was also included as a bonus track on the upcoming Excuse My French album. The run up to which included further video releases, including the Black Metaphor produced "Sanctuary" on February 3, Swizz Beatz produced "Diamonds" featuring Ross and J. Cole on February 17, and Fraud produced "State of Mind" on May 15 and "Intro (Only If For A Night)" on November 30, among others. Since the tapes' premiere on DatPiff, it would reach the 500K "double platinum" rating by first month, and presently stands at a "diamond" rating with over 1.4 million downloads on that site alone.


==== Excuse My French ====
In January 2013, French announced his second single "Freaks", featuring Nicki Minaj, from his upcoming album to be a remake of Lil Vicious' 1994 song of the same name. The song premiered on Hot 97 on February 13, with the music video coming out on March 3. The remix, featuring an additional Ross, Wale, Mavado and DJ Khaled, was released on April 25. A bonus track "Marble Floors" was released earlier on December 4, 2012, featuring Ross, Lil Wayne and 2 Chainz with production from Mike WiLL Made It. It would fast become a viral hit, only to be outdone by French's third single "Ain't Worried About Nothin" released on April 15, 2013. The music video premiered on May 7, and would be the last before the release of his album on May 21. Subsequent music videos included, "Trap House" featuring Ross and Birdman released on September 23, "Gifted" featuring The Weeknd on October 15, "Once In A While" featuring Max B on November 18, and "Paranoid" featuring Johnny May Cash on January 20, 2014, among others.
His first solo single "Ain't Worried About Nothin" was a hit on radio stations, and a remix featuring Ross, Diddy and Snoop Dogg was released on October 4, and a second remix featuring Miley Cyrus on October 14. Upon its release, Excuse My French was met with mixed reviews from music critics. It fared better commercially, debuting at number 4 on the Billboard 200 chart, with first-week sales of 56,000 copies in the United States. The album also featured collaborations with Raekwon, Scarface, Ne-Yo and Jeremih among others.
Following the album release, French announced signing Chicago-based rapper Lil Durk to his Coke Boys. French, who is close to producer Young Chop, had previously collaborated with Durk on his recent mixtape and with Chief Keef on his debut album the year before. Durk, Chinx and Young Chop appeared in the music video to "Paranoid", featuring Chop's brother Johnny May Cash. The song is inspired by French's brushes with death, including the late-2003 incident where he survived a gunshot to the head. Durk collaborated on several records with French in the coming years, starting with the remix to Durk's breakout single "Dis Ain't What U Want" featuring French, Ross and Meek Mill, released on November 27, 2013.
French appeared as a featured artist on several singles in 2013, most notably Joe Budden's "NBA" with Wiz Khalifa released on March 26; ASAP Ferg's "Work (Remix)" – alongside Schoolboy Q, ASAP Rocky and Trinidad James – on May 14; Canadian singer Massari's "Shisha" on May 21; and Will.i.am's "Feelin Myself" with Miley Cyrus and Wiz Khalifa on November 26, among others.


==== Pushbacks and comebacks ====
Despite several pushbacks, French released his seventeenth mixtape Coke Boys 4 on January 2, 2014, which included collaborations with Snoop Dogg, Wiz Khalifa, MGK, Mally Mall, Lil Durk and MeetSims, among others. The music video for the "Paranoid (Remix)" – featuring Diddy, Ross, Meek, Durk, Chinx and Jadakiss – was released on April 13. Subsequent music videos included, "88 Coupes" featuring Jadakiss released on May 15, "God Body" featuring Chinx on May 28, and "Money Bag" with Durk and Chinx on June 23. In a January 2014 Rolling Stone interview, French revealed that his next Mac & Cheese would be a studio album instead of a mixtape.In 2014, French collaborated with Diddy on Ross' track "Nobody" released on February 19. Rick Ross' remake of the late Notorious B.I.G.'s 1997 song "You're Nobody (Til Somebody Kills You)", featured an eerie chorus by French and interludes of Diddy in a live motivational rant. The song was inspired by Ross' brush against death the year before, when his Rolls-Royce came under repeated gunshot fire while driving through Fort Lauderdale, Florida, on January 28, 2013. In a bizarre series of events, French Montana would experience a similar but unrelated event months later when his convoy came under fire on March 1 in Philadelphia during his "Excuse My French" tour after French had finished performing a show hours earlier. The music video premiered on February 27, 2014. Albeit met with mixed to positive reviews, the song would be a hit and was re-released as a single on March 3, 2014. French joined Ross for a live performance on the television program Late Night with Seth Meyers on March 5, 2014.French Montana would collaborate with fellow-Bronx native Jennifer Lopez on her comeback single "I Luh Ya Papi". The song premiered on LA's Power 106 on March 5, and was released as a single on March 11, with the music video coming out two days later. The single was an international hit, and among the most added/played tracks on rhythmic contemporary radio in Canada. French also appeared in the music video to Fat Joe's single "Stressin", featuring Jennifer Lopez, which premiered in October later that year. French joined Rick Ross on Puff Daddy's comeback single "Big Homie" from his upcoming album MMM. With a guest verse by Ross and ad-libs by French, the single was released on March 24, with the music video premiering on March 31. French Montana joined Ross, Meek and veteran Jay-Z on DJ Khaled's summer hit "They Don't Love You No More". The single was released on March 29, with the music video coming out on June 22 that year.
On July 17, teasers to the movie The Purge: Anarchy were released featuring music from French's upcoming single "Don't Panic". A month earlier, Instagram photos of the two showed French with then-girlfriend Khloé Kardashian on set with matching masks on, prompting speculation whether she was in the coming video. Following weeks of promotion, the single was released on August 12. The music video, which retained the dark themes of the movie while maintaining its catchy DJ Mustard character, became a viral hit. The couple had created bit of a stir two months earlier, on June 2, when Khloé posted an IG photo of the two on set of "They Don't Love You No More", depicting French holding a rifle in his arms with Khloé seated next to him with a bottle of liquor to her mouth. The remix to "Don't Panic", featuring Jeremih and Chris Brown, was released on October 14.
French Montana would join Remy Ma on DJ Khaled's "They Don't Love You No More (Remix)" released on August 2. Khaled's former Terror Squad affiliate and Bronx-native Remy Ma had just been released from prison the day prior. The three appeared together in the music video which premiered on August 23. This was her first musical comeback since her incarceration six years earlier. French collaborated with Ashanti on her second single "Early In The Morning" released on October 14 off of her comeback album, Braveheart. This would be Ashanti's first album in six years.
French released his second single "Bad Bitch", featuring Jeremih, in December 2014, with the music video premiering on February 23, 2015. In late-October, French had announced his "Set It Off" tour with Jeremih, running up to his expected Mac & Cheese: The Album release in December. With the album eventually pushed back to next year; in its place, French released his collaborative EP with Harry Fraud, Mac & Cheese: The Appetizer on December 12, 2014. His eighteenth mixtape, The Appetizer marked a shift away from French's usual feature-heavy records. With Fraud's signature sample-heavy production, French blurred the lines between rap and R&B in a manner not unlike that of Max B, and with subject matter ranging from difficult life-decisions, women, addiction and memories of his bygone friendship with his now-incarcerated rap soulmate. In August 2015, French paired with pop-opera artist Charisse Mills for the single "Champagne."


=== 2016–present: Wave Gods, MC4, Jungle Rules, Montana, They Got Amnesia ===

On February 14, 2016, DJ Khaled announced that he would debut French's new mixtape on We The Best Radio. The mixtape, hosted by Max B, debuted on February 19, 2016. On May 5, 2016, French's contract with Interscope and MMG ended, and he later signed a joint venture record deal with Bad Boy and Epic Records. Later, French was going to release his second studio album MC4 in October 2016, however, the album's release was canceled after Target unofficially released the album on CD on its original release date (August 19, 2016), two months before the album was set to release, which also managed to leak its entirety on internet as a leak, plus some "sample clearance issues" on tracks like "I'm Heated" and 2 Times". It was originally supposed to be the fourth installment in the "Mac & Cheese" series, and the first to be originally released as an album. French later stated that he's planning to start a new record label with Max B when he is released. On November 5, 2016, Montana unexpectedly released the album as a mixtape instead and premiered it on Drake's Beats 1 radio show, OVO Sound radio later that night. Montana revealed in an interview with Zane Lowe on his Beats 1 radio show that the first and second single from his upcoming project is ready to be released. He also announced a collaborative track with Chance the Rapper and Quavo, produced by Ben Billions, a collaboration with Swae Lee that is "just like 'Unforgettable'", as well as a song called "No Stylist". On July 14, 2017, Montana released Jungle Rules as his second album.
On December 6, 2019, French Montana released his third studio album Montana, which includes the song "Writing on the Wall", a collaboration with Cardi B, Post Malone and Rvssian.
Montana's fourth studio album, They Got Amnesia was released through Epic Records on November 19, 2021, including the singles "FMWGAB", "I Don't Really Care", "Panicking", a collaboration with American rapper Fivio Foreign, and "Handstand", a collaboration with American rapper and singers Doja Cat  and Saweetie.French Montana, on June 9, 2022, released a song "Je M'appelle" with fellow Moroccan-British artist Benzz and Tion Wayne.
In 2023, the documentary "For Khadija" premiered at the Tribeca Film Festival. Directed by Mandon Lovett and co-executive produced by Sean "Diddy" Combes and Drake, the film documents the story of his family's emigration from Morocco to New York, and explores the plight of his single immigrant mother raising three sons and his rise to success as a recording artist.


== Controversy ==
French Montana's career has been the subject of many allegations of sexual misconduct in the 2020s, the earliest of which date back years. Several women accused him of rape, drug-facilitated sexual assault, sexual battery, sexual harassment, and sexual misconduct, allegations he denies, for which the statute of limitations either did not apply or had not elapsed, in nearly all cases. In March 2020, French Montana was accused of raping an incapacitated woman at his former home in Hidden Hills, California. Montana was sued by a woman using the pseudonym "Jane Doe", for assault and battery, sexual battery, intentional infliction of emotional distress, negligent hiring, supervision and retention and negligence, in connection to a March 28, 2018, incident reported to police in which the woman alleged Montana drugged her and raped her while she was incapacitated on his bathroom floor. The suit alleged Montana "would sometimes without the women's knowledge or consent provide drugs to interfere with the women's ability to knowingly consent to sexual activity and had a longstanding practice of inviting women to his recording sessions, or choosing women at bars." Montana allegedly supplied women with drinks and drugs, "with the purpose of engaging in sexual acts with them, without any regard to whether or not they consented, or were able to consent." According to her court filing, "Kharbouch (French Montana) was one of the men who entered the room and sexually assaulted her". Doe reported the alleged rape to the police that same day and had a rape kit administered;  a subsequent police investigation showed the presence of semen.In May 2021, Montana was accused of sexual assault by a second woman, Sarah Kamilla, a Moroccan model, who said Montana cornered her and attempted to rape her while she was in the bathroom during a dinner party hosted by Palestinian rapper Belly, at the W Hotel in Miami in 2017 when she was a teenager at the time. Montana was then accused of sexual assault by a third woman, Kayla Rose, in 2021 who alleged that he sexually assaulted her while she was in the bathroom in a hotel room in Las Vegas in 2018. Rose later filed a police report following the incident.In 2021, French Montana committed plagiarism. Montana copied and pasted the first verse of Astrid S' song "Jump" into the track "How You King?", without permission. Astrid S retroactively got proper attribution as a co-songwriter and received compensation for the lyrics that were plagiarized.


== Philanthropy ==
Montana's charitable work started after he visited Uganda to film his "Unforgettable" video in 2017, a song that gained over a billion streams and held strong on the top 10 in the Billboard Hot 100. His efforts in Uganda raised roughly US$500,000 to build the Suubi hospital which serves over 300,000 citizens of Uganda.In 2018, French was named an Ambassador for Global Citizen following his charitable donation of $100,000 for a hospital in Uganda. In 2022, it was reported that he helped raise over US$220 million for Uganda's maternal healthcare services. He received a 2022 Innovator Award for his efforts the same year.


== Personal life ==
Montana is fluent in his native Arabic and French as well as in English. He cites being a father as one of his driving inspirations. He is a practicing Muslim.Montana has been a resident of the Pompton Plains section of Pequannock Township, New Jersey. In 2016, he bought Selena Gomez's Calabasas, California home for $3.3 million.Montana married Deen Kharbouch in 2007. The couple had separated by 2012, and their divorce was finalized in 2014. They have a son who was born in October 2010.In June 2018, Montana became a U.S. citizen.


=== Shooting incident ===
In 2003, two gunmen shot at Montana as he left a recording studio in New York, striking him in the head. He survived and was hospitalized for several weeks. One of the gunmen died during the incident, in what is believed to be a case of "friendly fire" by one assailant against the other. Montana was investigated for the incident, but the case was eventually dismissed. In early 2013, Montana visited the site of the shooting with a camera crew from Life+Times as he recalled the near-death experience and his life growing up in the Bronx. This was the first time he had visited the location since the attempted murder ten years earlier. According to French, he was set up by someone close to him and his circle.


=== Exotic pets ===
French has been the owner of a number of pets, ranging from dogs to exotic animals such as tigers and a monkey. On April 22, 2013, French Montana posted an Instagram picture with the caption "Got so high last night bought 2 baby tigers". The picture was of French outdoors holding two tiger cubs, one on each arm. The tigers, named Ike and Tina, were prominently featured in French's music video for "The Gifted" featuring friend and singer The Weeknd, released later that year.  In 2014, the rapper noted he had given up the two tigers shortly after getting them, citing the difficulty in feeding and caring for the animals.Since late-2014, French Montana became the owner of a pet monkey named Julius Ceasor. A video of the animal was uploaded on December 18, showing French and record producer Mally Mall entering a private-jet with French then cradling the infant monkey in his arms.


== Musical influences ==
French Montana describes Tupac Shakur, The Notorious B.I.G., Nas, Snoop Dogg, and Wu-Tang Clan among the hip hop artists he listened to growing up. He considers himself a music lover in general, and admires the work of English soul/R&B singers Adele and Amy Winehouse, the English rock band Florence + the Machine, and American singer Lana Del Rey, several of whom he has sampled in his music.


== Discography ==

Excuse My French (2013)
Jungle Rules (2017)
Montana (2019)
They Got Amnesia (2021)


== Filmography ==


== Awards and nominations ==


=== African Muzik Magazine Awards ===


=== BET Awards ===


=== BET Hip Hop Awards ===


=== Billboard Music Awards ===


=== Grammy Awards ===


=== iHeartRadio Titanium Awards ===
iHeartRadio Titanium Awards are awarded to an artist when their song reaches 1 Billion Spins across iHeartRadio Stations.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official websiteYasiin Bey (; born Dante Terrell Smith, December 11, 1973), more commonly known by his former stage name Mos Def (), is an American rapper, singer, songwriter, and actor. 
He launched his hip hop career in 1994, joining his siblings in the short-lived rap group Urban Thermo Dynamics (UTD) and on albums by Da Bush Babees and De La Soul. In 1996, he and fellow Brooklyn-based rapper Talib Kweli formed Black Star, whose debut album Mos Def & Talib Kweli Are Black Star featured the singles "Definition" and "Respiration". He released his solo debut, Black on Both Sides in 1999, then The New Danger (2004), True Magic (2006), and The Ecstatic (2009). His hits include "Oh No", "Ms. Fat Booty", and "Mathematics". In 2014, About.com listed him 14th on its "50 Greatest Rappers of All Time".A former child actor in television films, sitcoms, and theater, Bey has appeared in the films Something the Lord Made, Next Day Air, The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy, 16 Blocks, Be Kind Rewind, The Italian Job, The Woodsman, Bamboozled, and Brown Sugar and in television series such as Dexter and House. He hosted Def Poetry Jam from 2002 to 2007.
Bey has spoken out on several social and political causes, including police brutality, American exceptionalism, and the status of African Americans.


== Early life ==
Yasiin Bey was born Dante Terrell Smith on December 11, 1973, in Brooklyn, New York City, the son of Sheron Smith and Abdulrahman Smith. The eldest of 12 children and step-children, he was raised by his mother in Brooklyn, while his father lived in New Jersey.His father was initially a member of the Nation of Islam and later followed Imam Warith Deen Mohammed, who merged into the mainstream Sunni Islam from the Nation of Islam. Bey was not exposed to Islam until the age of 13. He is close friends with fellow Muslim hip-hop artists Ali Shaheed Muhammad and Q-Tip.Bey attended middle school at Philippa Schuyler Middle School in Bushwick, Brooklyn, where he developed his love for acting. After returning from filming You Take the Kids in Los Angeles, and getting into a relationship with an older girl, Bey dropped out of high school during sophomore year. Growing up in New York City, during the crack epidemic of the 1980s and early 1990s, he has spoken about witnessing widespread instances of gang violence, theft, and poverty in society, which he largely avoided by working on plays, Off-Off-Broadway and arts programs. In a particularly traumatic childhood experience, Bey witnessed his then five-year-old younger brother, Ilias Bey (born Denard Smith), get hit by a car. Ilias later adopted the alias DCQ and was described by Bey as "my first partner in hip hop".


== Music career ==


=== 1994–1998: Beginnings with Rawkus and Black Star ===
Bey began his music career in 1994, forming the group UTD (or Urban Thermo Dynamics) along with younger brother DCQ and high-school friend Ces. In 2004, they released the album Manifest Destiny, their first and only release to date. The album features a compilation of previously unreleased and re-released tracks recorded during the original UTD run.In 1996, Bey emerged as a solo artist and worked with De La Soul and Da Bush Babees, before he released his own first single, "Universal Magnetic" in 1997.
Bey signed with Rawkus Records and formed the rap group Black Star with Talib Kweli. The duo released an album, Mos Def & Talib Kweli Are Black Star, in 1998. Mostly produced by Hi-Tek, the album featured the singles "Respiration" and "Definition", which both reached in the Billboard Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart.


=== 1999–2006: Solo career and various projects ===
Bey released his solo debut album Black on Both Sides in October 1999, also through Rawkus. The single "Ms. Fat Booty" charted, while the album reached #25 on the Billboard 200. Around this time, he also contributed to the Scritti Politti album Anomie & Bonhomie.
In January 2002, Rawkus Records was taken over by Geffen Records, which released his second solo album The New Danger in October 2004. It included contributions by Shuggie Otis and Bernie Worrell, Doug Wimbish, and Will Calhoun as the Black Jack Johnson Band. The album reached #5 on the Billboard 200, making it the most successful for the artist to date. The single "Sex, Love & Money" charted, and was nominated for a Grammy Award. Mos Def's final solo album for Geffen Records, titled True Magic, was released in 2006.


=== 2007–2011: Good Music era and name change ===
On November 7, 2007, Bey performed live in San Francisco at The Mezzanine venue. The performance was recorded for an upcoming "Live in Concert" DVD. During the event, he announced that he would be releasing a new album to be called The Ecstatic. He performed a number of new tracks; in later shows, he previewed tracks produced by Madlib and was rumored to be going to Kanye West for new material. Producer and fellow Def Poet Al Be Back revealed he would be producing on the album as well. The album was released on June 9, 2009; but only Madlib's production had made the cut, along with tracks by Preservation, The Neptunes, Mr. Flash, Madlib's brother Oh No, J. Dilla, and Georgia Anne Muldrow.
Bey appears alongside Kanye West on the track "Two Words" from The College Dropout album, the track "Drunk and Hot Girls" and the bonus track "Good Night" off West's third major album, Graduation. In 2002, he released the 12" single Fine, which was featured in the Brown Sugar Motion Picture Soundtrack.Bey also appears on the debut album from fellow New Yorkers Apollo Heights on a track titled, Concern. In October, he signed a deal with Downtown Records and appeared on a remix to the song D.A.N.C.E. by Justice. He appeared on Stephen Marley's debut album Mind Control on the song "Hey Baby". In 2009, he worked with Somali-Canadian rapper K'naan to produce the track "America" for K'naan's album Troubadour.In April 2008, he appeared on the title track for a new album by The Roots titled Rising Down. The new single, Life In Marvelous Times, was made officially available through iTunes on November 4, 2008, and was also available for stream on the Roots' website Okayplayer.
In April 2009, Bey traveled to South Africa for the first time, and performed with The Robert Glasper Experiment at the renowned Cape Town International Jazz Festival. He treated the South African audience with an encore, introduced by his own rendition of John Coltrane's A Love Supreme, followed by a sneak preview of the track "M.D. (Doctor)".Bey has designed two pairs of limited edition Converse shoes. The shoes were released through Foot Locker stores on August 1, 2009, in limited amounts.In late 2009, he created his own clothing line with the "UNDRCRWN" brand called the "Mos Def Cut & Sew Collection". The items were released in select U.S. stores and almost exclusively on the UNDRCRWN website. That year, he was among the MCs aligned with American entrepreneur Damon Dash's DD172 and collaborating with American blues rock band the Black Keys on the Blakroc album, a project headed by the Black Keys and Damon Dash. Bey appeared with Harlem-bred rapper Jim Jones and the Black Keys on the Late Show with David Letterman to perform the Blakroc track "Ain't Nothing Like You (Hoochie Coo)".
In March 2010, Bey's song "Quiet Dog Bite Hard" was featured in Palm's "Life moves fast. Don't miss a thing." campaign.Bey features on the first single, "Stylo", from the third Gorillaz album, Plastic Beach, alongside soul legend Bobby Womack. He also appears on the track titled "Sweepstakes".
In September 2010, after appearing on Kanye West's G.O.O.D. Friday track "Lord Lord Lord", Bey confirmed he had signed with GOOD Music. Bey has been an active contributor to the recovery of the oil spill in the Gulf, performing concerts and raising money towards repairing its damages. In June 2010, he recorded a cover of the classic New Orleans song originally by Smokey Johnson, "It Ain't My Fault" with the Preservation Hall Jazz Band, Lenny Kravitz and Trombone Shorty.
In September 2011, the rapper announced that he legally changed his name to Yasiin Bey and would go by that name, retiring his Mos Def moniker. Bey told a reporter "I began to fear that Mos Def was being treated as a product, not a person, so I’ve been going by Yasiin since ’99. At first it was just for friends and family, but now I'm declaring it openly." Bey also stated "Mos Def is a name that I built and cultivated over the years, it's a name that the streets taught me, a figure of speech that was given to me by the culture and by my environment, and I feel I've done quite a bit with that name. ...it's time to expand and move on." Yasiin is a name in the Qur'an's 36th surah and was important to the rapper who converted to Islam in his teens. Bey said the name change would eliminate "having any moniker or separation between the self that I see and know myself as."Shortly after the name change announcement, Bey recorded as the narrator of the children's hip hop musical, Pacha's Pajamas: A Story Written By Nature.


=== 2012–present: Later career and retirement ===
In January 2012, it was reported that Bey and Talib Kweli had begun "to resurrect" Black Star. In 2015, Bey was featured on A$AP Rocky's second studio album At. Long. Last. ASAP, on the track "Back Home", alongside Acyde and the deceased A$AP Yams. Bey again revived his Mos Def moniker for two new songs in August 2015, titled "Basquiat Ghostwriter" and "Sensei on the Block", respectively.On January 19, 2016, Bey announced his retirement from both the music and film industries on Kanye West's website: "I'm retiring from the music recording industry as it is currently assembled today, and also Hollywood, effective immediately. I'm releasing my final album this year, and that's that." After announcing his retirement, he expressed gratitude to everyone who has supported him over the years and revealed his intention to enter the fashion industry and complete a handful of films. Bey also confirmed he still planned to release a collaborative project with Ferrari Sheppard called Dec 99th.In October 2016, a planned concert in London was cancelled due to travel restrictions imposed on the artist; other European dates suffered the same fate. On October 14, Bey posted a video to Facebook where he announced that he was still planning to retire: "I'm retiring for real this year, this week. With the 17th anniversary of Black on Both Sides being released, I am grateful to have had the career that I have been able to enjoy." He also announced one last concert which he said he would be live streaming from Cape Town, South Africa. In November 2016, he was granted the ability to leave but not reenter South Africa and was put on "South Africa's 'undesirable persons' list". He said he would perform one show in Harlem and three in Washington D.C. after leaving South Africa. He announced that Dec 99th, his final album, would be released on December 9. He released three singles from it, "Local Time", "N.A.W." and "Seaside Panic Room". On December 5, 2016, he announced the title of two albums, Negus in Natural Person and As Promised, the latter of which is a collaboration with Southern hip hop producer Mannie Fresh, initially titled OMFGOD. His claims of retirement were seen as questionable as he played shows on September 13, 2017, at the Fox Theater in Oakland as part of Black Star and performed on Gorillaz' Humanz World Tour, performing "Stylo" with Peven Everett, who filled in for Bobby Womack, who died in 2014. He also has yet to release or announce a release date for the last two albums of his career.In February 2018, Bey announced, on stage, a new Black Star studio album, produced by Madlib, would be released in 2018. However, no specific release date was made available. Later on that year, Bey appeared on the titular track of Kids See Ghosts, the collaborative effort of Kanye West and Kid Cudi. In March 2019, he debuted his album, ንጉሥ (pronounced Negus) at a listening session as part of Art Basel Hong Kong. In a press release, he said that the album "will continue to unfold as a series of varied installations around the world". He has no plans of releasing the album digitally or physically.On June 28, 2019, Bey appeared on Bandana, an album by Freddie Gibbs and Madlib, alongside Black Thought, on a track named "Education". In November 2019, he stated that unreleased music, such as his collaborative album with Mannie Fresh, was still "on deck" for release. In 2021, he launched "The Midnight Miracle" podcast on Luminary, along with Dave Chappelle and Talib Kweli. In April 2022, a release date for the long-awaited Black Star project was officially announced. The album titled No Fear of Time was released via Luminary on May 3, 2022.


== Acting career ==


=== Beginnings as child actor ===
Prior to his career in music, Bey entered public life as a child actor, having played roles in television movies, sitcoms and theater, some of which were under the name Dante Beze. At the age of 14, he appeared in the TV movie God Bless the Child, starring Mare Winningham, which aired on ABC in 1988. He played the oldest child in the 1990 family sitcom You Take the Kids, shortly before it was cancelled. In 1995, he played the character Dante, Bill Cosby's sidekick on the short-lived detective show The Cosby Mysteries. In 1996, he starred in a Visa check card commercial featuring Deion Sanders. He also had a small role alongside Michael Jackson in his short film and music video Ghosts (1997).


=== Feature films, theater and television ===
After brief appearances in Bamboozled and Monster's Ball, Bey played a rapper who is reluctant to sign with a major label in Brown Sugar. He was nominated for an Image Award and a Teen Choice Award.In 2001, he took a supporting role to Beyoncé Knowles and Mehki Phifer in the MTV movie Carmen: A Hip Hopera as Lt. Miller, a crooked cop.
In 2002, he played the role of Booth in Suzan-Lori Parks' Topdog/Underdog, a Tony-nominated and Pulitzer-winning Broadway play. He and co-star Jeffrey Wright won a Special Award from the Outer Critics Circle Award for their joint performance. He played Left Ear in the 2003 film The Italian Job. That same year, he appeared in the Alicia Keys music video You Don't Know My Name.
In television, Bey has appeared on NYPD Blue, Comedy Central's Chappelle's Show, and hosted the award-winning HBO spoken word show Def Poetry. He also appeared on the sitcom My Wife and Kids as the disabled friend of Michael Kyle (Damon Wayans).
Bey won "Best Actor, Independent Movie" at the 2005 Black Reel Awards for his portrayal of Detective Sgt. Lucas in The Woodsman. For his portrayal of Vivien Thomas in HBO's film Something the Lord Made, he was nominated for an Emmy and a Golden Globe, and won the Image Award. He also played a bandleader in HBO's Lackawanna Blues. He then landed the role of Ford Prefect in the 2005 movie adaptation of The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy.

In 2006, Bey appeared in Dave Chappelle's Block Party alongside Black Star partner Talib Kweli, while also contributing to the film's soundtrack. He was also featured as the banjo player in the Pixie Sketch" from Chappelle's Show: The Lost Episodes, though his appearance was edited out of the DVD. He starred in the action film 16 Blocks alongside Bruce Willis and David Morse. He also landed a recurring guest role on Boondocks, starring as Gangstalicious. He is set to be in Toussaint, a film about Haitian revolutionary Toussaint Louverture, opposite Don Cheadle and Wesley Snipes. He made a cameo appearance as himself in the movie Talladega Nights: The Ballad of Ricky Bobby.
In 2007, Bey narrated the PBS-broadcast documentary Prince Among Slaves.
In 2008, Bey starred in the Michel Gondry movie Be Kind Rewind, playing a video rental store employee whose best friend is played by co-star Jack Black. He also portrayed Chuck Berry in the film Cadillac Records, for which he was nominated for a Black Reel Award and an Image Award.
In 2009, he appeared in the House episode titled "Locked In" as a patient suffering from locked-in syndrome. His performance was well received, with E! saying that Mos Def "delivers an Emmy-worthy performance". He was also in the 2009 film Next Day Air.
In 2010, he appeared on the children's show Yo Gabba Gabba! as Super Mr. Superhero. He also appeared in A Free Man of Color, John Guare's play at the Vivian Beaumont Theatre.In 2011, he began a multi-episode appearance on the sixth season of Showtime television series Dexter. He played Brother Sam, an ex-convict who has supposedly found religion despite finding himself in violent situations.In January 2016, Bey announced his retirement from the music and the film industries on Kanye West's website. In March 2016, it was announced that he had been attached to star in "his last live-action film", The Disconnected, a science fiction thriller dealing with policing, identity, and the intersection of technology and humanity.


== Social and political views ==
In 2000, paired with Talib Kweli, Bey organized the Hip Hop for Respect project to speak out against police brutality. It was created in response to the 1999 police shooting of Amadou Diallo, and sought to accumulate 41 artists to the roster, one to match each of the 41 gunshots fired on Diallo.
Bey is well known for his leftist activism. In 2000, he performed a benefit concert for death row inmate Mumia Abu-Jamal. In May 2005, Bey, Talib Kweli, R&B singer Martin Luther and City Councilman Charles Barron approached New York City Hall, demanding the withdrawal of the $1 million bounty for Assata Shakur.In September 2005, Bey released the single "Katrina Clap", renamed "Dollar Day" for True Magic (utilizing the instrumental for New Orleans rappers UTP's "Nolia Clap"). The song is a criticism of the Bush administration's response to Hurricane Katrina. On the night of the MTV Video Music Awards, Bey pulled up in front of Radio City Music Hall on a flatbed truck and began performing the "Katrina Clap" single in front of a crowd that quickly gathered around him. He was subsequently arrested for not having a public performance permit in his possession.In October 2006, Bey appeared on 4Real, a documentary television series. Appearing in the episode "City of God", he and the 4Real crew traveled to City of God, a favela in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, to meet Brazilian MC MV Bill and learn about the crime and social problems of the community.On September 7, 2007, Bey appeared on Real Time with Bill Maher where he spoke about racism against African Americans, citing the government response to Hurricane Katrina, the Jena Six case, and the murder conviction of Mumia Abu-Jamal. He appeared on Real Time again on March 27, 2009, and spoke about the risk of nuclear weapons.In September 2011, Bey joined the cast of the environmental children's hip hop musical Pacha's Pajamas: A Story Written By Nature as narrator. In July 2013, he appeared in a short film released by the human rights organization Reprieve, depicting the forced-feeding methods used at the Guantanamo Bay detention camps. This transpired after a document containing the military instructions for the procedure was leaked.In September 2018, Bey and advertising executive Free Richardson opened an art exhibition to the public in an art gallery in the South Bronx, called the Compound, centered around hip-hop and fine art. The goal of this gallery was to help bridge the gap between the two fields, by showcasing artists from marginalized backgrounds who normally would not be represented in art galleries. Art forms with negative connotations, such as graffiti, as presented in a more optimal context. "The purpose of the gallery is to say all art is equal," Mr. Richardson said. "But we are in the borough that created hip-hop, which is the biggest art form in the world, so it's always an extending arm. It's always present."


== Legacy ==
About.com ranked him #14 on its list of the Top 50 MCs of Our Time, and The Source ranked him #23 on their list of the Top 50 Lyricists of All Time. AllMusic called him one of the most promising rappers to emerge in the late 1990s, and one of hip-hop's brightest hopes entering the 21st century. He has influenced numerous hip hop artists throughout his career, including Lupe Fiasco, Jay Electronica, Kid Cudi, and Saigon, and Logic. Kendrick Lamar once mentioned him as a very early inspiration as a young rapper, though Lamar denied being a part of the conscious rap movement. He has also directly influenced artists outside of hip-hop, including English singer-songwriters Adele and Amy Winehouse.


== Personal life ==
Bey married Maria Yepes in 1996. He filed for divorce from Yepes in 2006. She took him to court over failure in child-support obligations, paying $2,000 short of the monthly $10,000 he is ordered to pay for their two daughters. He has four other children.His mother Sheron "Umi" Smith has actively managed portions of her son's career. She is a motivational speaker, and authored the book Shine Your Light: A Life Skills Workbook, where she details her experience as a single mother raising him.In January 2016, Bey was ordered to leave South Africa and not return for five years, having stayed in the country illegally on an expired tourist visa granted in May 2013. That month, he was charged with using an unrecognized World Passport and having lived illegally in South Africa since 2014. He had reportedly recruited Kanye West to help defend him, and posted a message on West's website announcing his retirement from show business. There was an ongoing court case in relation to immigration offenses involving the artist and his family. He was allowed to leave South Africa on November 22, 2016, but he was barred from coming back.


== Discography ==


=== Solo albums ===
Black on Both Sides (1999)
The New Danger (2004)
True Magic (2006)
The Ecstatic (2009)
ንጉሥ (Negus) (2019)


=== Collaborative albums ===

Mos Def & Talib Kweli Are Black Star (with Talib Kweli, as Black Star) (1998)
Manifest Destiny (with Ces and DCQ, as UTD) (2004)
December 99th (with Ferrari Sheppard, as Dec 99th) (2016)
No Fear of Time (with Talib Kweli, as Black Star) (2022)
As Promised (with Mannie Fresh) (TBA)


== Filmography ==


== Accolades ==


=== BET Awards ===


=== Black Movie Awards ===


=== Black Reel Awards ===


=== Gold Derby Awards ===


=== Golden Globe Awards ===


=== Gotham Awards ===


=== Grammy Awards ===


=== MOBO Awards ===


=== NAACP Image Awards ===


=== NAMIC Vision Awards ===


=== Online Film & Television Association Awards ===


=== Primetime Emmy Awards ===


=== Satellite Awards ===


=== Stinkers Bad Movie Awards ===


=== Teen Choice Awards ===


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==

Mos Def / Dante Smith discographies at Discogs.
Mos Def at IMDbAli Shaheed Muhammad (born August 11, 1970) is an American hip hop DJ, record producer, and rapper, best known as a member of A Tribe Called Quest. With Q-Tip and Phife Dawg (and sometimes Jarobi White), the group released five studio albums from 1990 to 1998 before disbanding; their final album was released in 2016. A native of Brooklyn, New York, as of 2020, Muhammad lived in Los Angeles.


== Career ==
Muhammad is a Muslim. Together with Jay Dee and Q-Tip, he formed the music-production collective the Ummah.After A Tribe Called Quest disbanded, Muhammad formed the R&B supergroup Lucy Pearl with Dawn Robinson, formerly of En Vogue and Raphael Saadiq, formerly of Tony! Toni! Toné!, releasing one album in 2000. On October 12, 2004, he released his debut solo album, Shaheedullah and Stereotypes. Muhammad co-hosted the Microphone Check radio show, which ran on NPR until 2016, and on Spotify until 2019.In 2013, Muhammad worked with producer Adrian Younge on the Souls of Mischief album There Is Only Now, as the album's narrator. Since then Muhammad and Younge have collaborated to co-produce the soundtrack for both seasons of the Luke Cage TV series, and they have toured together since 2018 as the Midnight Hour, releasing an album by the same name.In 2019, Muhammad contributed to Saadiq's fifth album, Jimmy Lee.In 2020, Muhammad and Younge launched the Jazz Is Dead album series, collaborating with jazz musicians Roy Ayers, Marcos Valle, Doug Carn, Gary Bartz, João Donato, and the trio Azymuth.


== Discography ==

Studio albums

Shaheedullah and Stereotypes (2004)with Lucy Pearl

Lucy Pearl (2000)with Adrian Younge

Luke Cage (Original Soundtrack Album) (2016)
Luke Cage: Season 2 (Original Soundtrack Album) (2018)
The Midnight Hour (as The Midnight Hour) (2018)
Jazz Is Dead 001 (2020)
Roy Ayers JID002 (2020)
Marcos Valle JID003 (2020)
Azymuth JID004 (2020)
Doug Carn JID005 (2020)
Gary Bartz JID006 (2021)
João Donato JID007 (2021)
Brian Jackson JID008 (2021)
Instrumentals JID009 (2021)
Remixes JID010 (2021)
Jazz is Dead 011 (2022)
Jean Carne JID012 (2022)
Katalyst JID013 (2022)
Henry Franklin JID014 (2022)
Garret Saracho JID015 (2022)
Phil Ranelin and Wendell Harrison JID016 (2023)
Lonnie Liston Smith JID017 (2023)


== See also ==
A Tribe Called Quest
Lucy Pearl
The Ummah
Native Tongues
Raphael Saadiq
Chalmers Alford
D'Angelo
Fu-Schnickens


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website
Official A Tribe Called Quest website
Ali Shaheed Muhammad at IMDbLeonard Carl Grant (born July 25, 1980), better known by his stage name Uncle Murda, is an American rapper from East New York, Brooklyn. He signed to 50 Cent's G-Unit Records in 2016, having been previously signed to Jay-Z's Roc-A-Fella Records in 2007. He is known for his annual retrospective "Rap Up" song series, which lyrically documents major events in hip hop, beginning in 2014.


== Career ==
In 2007, his manager and DJ Green Lantern introduced Uncle Murda's music to Jay-Z. The Brooklyn-born rapper/CEO signed Uncle Murda to Roc-A-Fella Records soon after. They started to promote him immediately by placing him on a track with popular label-mates Fabolous and Jay-Z for the song "Brooklyn" (featured on From Nothin' to Somethin' album) and everything seemed to be going well for the rapper.  However in late 2008 rumors that Uncle Murda left Def Jam came about. In an interview with DJ Vlad, Uncle Murda confirmed the rumors that he has split from Def Jam and Roc-A-Fella Records claiming everything went downhill since Jay-Z's departure.On November 8, 2016, Uncle Murda signed a deal with 50 Cent and G-Unit Records.


=== Shooting ===
On January 22, 2008, Uncle Murda was shot directly in the head while in a parked car on Linden Blvd. in East New York, but was not seriously hurt. Murda would later give contradictory accounts of the incident, saying he was only grazed by a bullet or hit by a piece of glass.  The shooting happened after the rapper released his mixtape entitled "Respect the Shooter". He discharged himself from the hospital less than 24 hours after he was admitted, with the bullet still in his skull. Uncle Murda called the nationally syndicated The Wendy Williams Experience radio show after the shooting and told her he was using "Hennessy and Newports to cope with the pain". No charges were filed, as Uncle Murda refused to cooperate with investigators, blaming the police for the shooting.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===
2023: The Lenny Grant Story


=== Mixtapes ===
2005: Murder Capitol
2006: Say Uncle: 2 Hard for Hip-Hop
2006: Respect the Shooter
2007: Murda Muzik
2008: Hard to Kill
2008: Back on My Bullshit
2008: Rudy King
2008: Murda Muzik 2: Return of the Bad Guy
2009: Summer Time Shootouts
2013: The First 48
2013: Murda Muzik 3
2014: Ain't Nothin' Sweet
2016: Yellow Tape (with Maino)
2017: Don't Come Outside, Vol. 1
2020: Don't Come Outside, Vol. 2
2021: Don't Come Outside, Vol.3
2022: Love Don't Live Here


=== Singles ===
2007: "Bullet Bullet"
2007: "Run The City"
2007: "Children's Story"
2007: "Hard to Kill"
2008: "Still Run The City"
2008: "Anybody Can Get It" (original song made and featured in Grand Theft Auto IV)
2009: "Murdera" (featuring Akon)
2011: "Warning"
2011: "Warning (Remix)" (featuring French Montana, Jadakiss, Styles P, Jim Jones, Vado and Cam'ron)
2011: "Warning (Remix)" (featuring 50 Cent, Mariah Carey and Young Jeezy)
2012: "Money Work" (featuring French Montana)
2013: "9's and 45's"
2014: "Yearly Rap Up"
2015: "Body Dance" (featuring Bobby Shmurda)
2015: "Right Now" (featuring Future)
2016: "Thot" (featuring Young M.A and Dios Moreno)
2017: "On & On" (featuring 50 Cent and Jeremih)
2018: "Get the Strap" (featuring Casanova, 6ix9ine and 50 Cent)
2018: "Hold Up" (featuring Dave East)
2019: "62" (feat Tory Lanez)
2019: "It Hit Different"
2019: "Who The Boss Is"
2019: "God I F With You"
2019: "Dope Money"
2020: "Party Full Of Demons" (featuring Que Banz)
2021: "So What" (featuring Eli Fross)
2022: "Justin Laboy Page


=== Guest appearances ===


== References ==Keith Omar Murray (born September 13, 1974) is an American rapper from New York. He is best known for being a member of the hip hop group Def Squad, which includes fellow rappers Redman and fellow Long Island native Erick Sermon.
Murray debuted his spaced out, complex, multi-syllable rhyming style in 1994, when Murray recorded his debut single, "The Most Beautifullest Thing in This World" for Jive Records, which was quickly followed up by his debut album of the same name, released to critical and commercial success. Along with Def Squad, he was a part of their debut album, El Niño in 1998.


== Career ==


=== 1990–1995: Early years ===
Murray got his start in the music industry under the name MC Do Damage, but later decided to just go by his birth name.
In 1994, he was introduced to Erick Sermon of EPMD by his friend K-Solo. Sermon included Murray on his album No Pressure on the single "Hostile", with critics praising Murray's lyrical ability. His appearance on Hostile led to Murray being signed to Jive Records, and work began on his first album. Murray's debut single, The Most Beautifullest Thing in This World was released in 1994 and was a hit. The song was produced by Erick Sermon (who also provided background vocals) and peaked at number 50 on the Billboard 200 and number 3 on the Hot Rap Singles chart. Murray's debut album The Most Beautifullest Thing in This World, was named after the single and released in 1994 to widespread critical acclaim and commercial success, being certified Gold by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) in August 1995. The album was also given "4 mics" by The Source.
Murray continued to enjoy a high media-profile by appearing on a Coca-Cola advertisement and as a featured guest on Mary J Blige's "Be Happy", Total's "Can't You See", R Kelly's "Home Alone" and both versions of LL Cool J's "I Shot Ya". However, his appearances of both versions of "I Shot Ya" led to brief friction with rapper Tupac Shakur, who believed that the song was a diss towards him being shot and robbed at Quad Recording Studios, regarding the timing, title, and lyrical content. Sometime in the following year, Tupac Shakur approached Keith Murray at the California House Of Blues, wanting to know if the record was a diss to him. Upon questioning, Murray made it clear that the record was not about Shakur, peacefully resolving the situation. Murray has continued to publicly address this in several interviews over the following years.


=== 1996–1998: Def Squad ===
Murray's second album Enigma was released on November 26, 1996, on Jive, once again to critical acclaim. The album peaked at number 39 on the U.S. Billboard 200 and reached number 6 on the R&B Albums chart. Murray also continued to work with other artists, appearing on tracks by Busta Rhymes, UGK, Redman and Jamal.
In 1998, Murray and The Def Squad released their debut album, El Niño, which peaked at number 2 on the Billboard 200 and was certified Gold by the RIAA.
Murray's third solo album It's a Beautiful Thing was released in 1998 while Murray was incarcerated for assault.


=== 2001–present: He's Keith Murray and release from Def Jam ===
After Murray was released from prison, he signed with Def Jam who released He's Keith Murray in 2003, once again to critical and commercial success. The album contained the single "Yeah Yeah U Know It.", and featured guest appearances from Busta Rhymes, Redman and Jamie Foxx, among others. The same year, Murray was featured as a playable character in the video game Def Jam Vendetta. Despite the success and acclaim of his first album on Def Jam after this, Murray was dropped from the label just one day after its release after being accused of choking two label employees, although he said the confrontation was limited to words. After being released, Murray announced plans to continue recording music independently.He released his fifth solo album Rap-Murr-Phobia on July 31, 2007. It debuted at number 52 on the U.S. Billboard 200 chart. The lead single was "Nobody Do It Better" featuring Tyrese and Junior.


== Legal issues ==
In May 25, 1995, Murray was arrested after being accused of hitting a man with a barstool in a fight and released on bail. After being sentenced to three years in 1998, Murray, who maintains his innocence, fled from authorities until October 1998, when he turned himself in. Murray filed a lawsuit for wrongful conviction, and later dropped the suit in exchange for his sentence being reduced by three months. Murray served the latter portion of his sentence in the Maple Street Halfway House facility before being released on May 14, 2001.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===
The Most Beautifullest Thing in This World (1994)
Enigma (1996)
It's a Beautiful Thing (1999)
He's Keith Murray (2003)
Rap-Murr-Phobia (The Fear of Real Hip-Hop) (2007)
Intellectual Violence (2008)
Puff Puff Pass (2008)
Lord of the Metaphor (2018)
Lord of the Metaphor 2 (2019)


=== Collaboration albums ===
El Niño with Def Squad (1998)
Canibus & Keith Murray are The Undergods - In Gods We Trust,Crush Microphones to Dust (2011)


== References ==


== External links ==
Keith Murray on MyspaceNene Encarnacion, also known as Myzery, is a Puerto Rican rapper based out of the Bronx in New York City. He was the first solo act signed with Psychopathic Records, and released his debut EP titled Para La Isla on the label in 1998. Following his departure from Psychopathic Records, Myzery continued to release albums independently. He later returned to Psychopathic Records to release 2018's The Demon Angel.


== Career ==
Born in the Bronx, Myzery started rapping while growing up through hard times. He expressed his street life and overall mentality through his music. Although Myzery was classified as a rapper, he described his music as "read(ing) my diary over a beat with bars." He was involved in the rap group Boriqua Bee-Hive under the name Rhyme Recker. Eventually, his sister Nancy married rapper Jumpsteady, and the two had a daughter together named Sammy. Jumpsteady introduced Myzery to the Psychopathic Records family, and his brother Violent J of Insane Clown Posse took an interest in the Puerto Rican rapper, and offered him an outlet for his music in 1997.Myzery's first widespread appearance with the label was a cameo in the music video for Insane Clown Posse's song "Hokus Pokus" off their 1997 album The Great Milenko. He then went on tour with Insane Clown Posse, House of Krazees, and Psycho Realm. In January 1998, the entire touring lineup was arrested at a Waffle House during a quarrel with a heckling customer, which had garnered the three acts media attention. Myzery released his debut EP Para La Isla in February 1998, and it was Psychopathic Records' first solo album not released by an Insane Clown Posse member. Myzery also made an appearance on Twiztid's (formerly House of Krazees) debut album Mostasteless, but the track ("Meat Cleaver") was cut on the reissue of the album. The track later appeared on Twiztid's rarities compilation Cryptic Collection and the label's compilation Psychopathics From Outer Space.In 1999, Myzery appeared in the movie Big Money Hustlas as Green Willie and also was a member of the group Psychopathic Rydas as Twin Gatz. He appeared on their debut album Dumpin' in 1999 on numerous tracks. In addition, the tracks from his debut EP appeared on multiple Psychopathic Records compilations and samplers. He also appeared at the earliest incarnation of Juggalo Championship Wrestling (then known as Hellfire Wrestling). He was also a founding member of Dark Lotus alongside Twiztid and Insane Clown Posse, but no tracks were entirely recorded with him as a member. The initial follow-up to Para La Isla was planned to be titled simply Misery, but the album was indefinitely shelved. From 1999 to 2001, Myzery focused on a project titled The Four Faces of Nay Nay. The gimmick was conceived by Violent J, and Myzery had portrayed four different personalities for the album (Myzery, Diabloa, Dr. Giggles, and The Spanish Thug). Guest appearances by Insane Clown Posse and Ice-T was planned as well. The project was eventually cancelled, but a few tracks were released on the limited edition EPs 4 Faces and DP, inc., and the limited edition compilation 4 Faces of Myzery.
Myzery was announced to appear at the initial Gathering of the Juggalos event in 2000, but ultimately did not appear. He made a return at the 2001 Gathering of the Juggalos, but after the performances, he had an altercation with labelmates Twiztid and Blaze Ya Dead Homie at a hotel. Violent J insisted that fighting within the family wasn't healthy, and Myzery distanced himself from Psychopathic Records. The beef was later squashed years later. He continued to release albums independently, such as 2002's The Red Eye and 2003's Bad Influence. Myzery also made a guest appearance on Jumpsteady's second album Master of the Flying Guillotine in 2005. From 2007 to 2009, rumors circulated on the internet that Myzery had died. Apparently, a friend of Myzery had created the rumor. But the intent wasn't to fake Myzery's death; rather, it was to signify that Myzery's rapping career was over. The rumor was invalidated and unappreciated by Myzery, causing severed ties within the crew.After the rumor was squashed, Myzery reappeared with the intent to continue rapping. His first independent release upon his return was the Heaven or Hell mixtape. He then announced that his newest album was to be titled The Demon Angel, and he had made his return to the Gathering of the Juggalos in 2012. In addition, his rare underground album Love/Hate became a free download on his website, along with a recording he did for the 2004 Puerto Rican Day Parade. Also, Myzery compiled tracks that he considered most worthy throughout his career, and released it as His.Story. Myzery also started to collaborate with Psychopathic Records again. He appeared on DJ Clay's 2013 mixtape A World Upside Down: The Mixxtape, Insane Clown Posse's 2017 reissue of The Great Milenko, and a 2017 Psychopathic Records EP with various artists titled Bloody Screams of 17 (which was given away during Myzery's appearance at Hallowicked 2017 and later sold online). Myzery's comeback album The Demon Angel was originally announced in October 2010; however, 8 years later, it was finally released at the 2018 Gathering of the Juggalos, packaged together with Para La Isla 20th Anniversary Edition. The first CD consisted of Myzery's debut EP Para La Isla, along with five unreleased tracks that were recorded during the same era. The second CD consisted of The Demon Angel in its official and final capacity. The double disc bundle was released on Psychopathic Records, as it marked Myzery's return to his former label.


== Discography ==


=== Major releases ===
Para La Isla (1998) (Psychopathic Records)
The Demon Angel (2018) (Psychopathic Records)


=== Independent releases ===
4 Faces (Tour EP 1999)
DP, inc. (Tour EP 2001)
The Red Eye (LP 2002, reissued 2004)
Bad Influence (LP 2003)
Puerto Rican Day Parade (Tour EP 2004, reissued 2012)
Rydas 4 Life (LP 2006)
Love/Hate (LP 2006, reissued 2012)
Hate Me More (LP 2009)
Reloaded (LP 2009)
Heaven or Hell (Mixtape 2012) 


=== Compilations ===
The Four Faces of Myzery (DP, inc. and 4 Faces EPs with bonus tracks, released in 2004)
Myzery Classics (Pre-Psychopathic Records tracks, released in 2004)
His.Story (Handpicked tracks, released in 2012)
Para La Isla 20th Anniversary Edition (Recorded between 1997 and 2000, released in 2018) (Psychopathic Records)


=== Collaborations ===
Mostasteless (LP 1998, with Twiztid)
Psychopathic '98 Sampler (EP 1998, with Psychopathic Records)
Forgotten Freshness Volumes 1 & 2 (Double Compilation 1998, with Insane Clown Posse)
Dumpin' (LP 1999, with Psychopathic Rydas)
The Juggalo Show (Boxset 1999, with Psychopathic Records)
Psychopathics From Outer Space (Compilation 1999, with Psychopathic Records)
Cryptic Collection (Compilation 2000, with Twiztid)
Hatchet History (Compilation 2002, with Psychopathic Records)
Master of the Flying Guillotine (LP 2005, with Jumpsteady)
Evil Is... (Vol. 2) (Compilation 2007, with Long Range Distribution)
Twin Gatz: The Lost Sessions (Compilation 2008, with T.O.N.E-z)
The Lime Light (LP 2011, with T.O.N.E-z)
420 After Party (EP 2012, with Delusional)
A World Upside Down: The Mixxtape (Mixtape 2013, with DJ Clay)
Hell n Back (Mixtape 2013, with Fuego Flamez)
Farewell for Now (Mixtape 2016, with Fuego Flamez)
Assimilation (EP 2016, with Bukshot)
The Great Milenko (LP Reissue 2017, with Insane Clown Posse)
Bloody Screams of 17 (EP 2017, with Psychopathic Records)
The Mothership (Boxset 2018, with Bukshot)


== References ==


== External links ==
Myzery Official SiteVictor James Santiago, Jr. (born September 6, 1977), better known by his stage names N.O.R.E. and Noreaga, is an American rapper and broadcaster. Born and raised in Queens, New York, Santiago first rose to prominence as one half of the East Coast hip hop duo Capone-N-Noreaga (C-N-N), alongside fellow Queens-based rapper Capone. He would also have success as a solo artist with the singles "Superthug", "Banned from T.V." (featuring Big Pun, Nature, Cam'ron, Jadakiss, and Styles P), "Nothin'" (featuring Pharrell) and "Oye Mi Canto".
Santiago has released music under various record labels, including Penalty, Roc-La-Familia, Def Jam, and Babygrande Records. In June 2011, it was announced Santiago partnered with fellow American rapper Busta Rhymes' Conglomerate label, where he released his 2013 album Student of the Game, issued under E1 Music. Santiago is also chief executive officer (CEO) of his own label imprint, Militainment Business.
Outside of music, Santiago is the co-host (with DJ EFN) of the talk show/podcast Drink Champs, which centers around celebrity interviews. The show has been described as "The Premier Hip Hop Interview Show" and has won "Best Hip Hop Platform" at the 2022 BET Hip Hop Awards.


== Musical career ==


=== 1995–1997: Career beginnings with Capone ===

Santiago's career began to take off in 1995, while under the pseudonym Noreaga (after Panamanian ruler Manuel Noriega) as part of the duo Capone-N-Noreaga alongside friend and fellow Queens-based rapper Capone, whom he met while serving time in prison. Santiago grew up in LeFrak City and spent time hanging out in Capone’s neighbouring Queensbridge Houses. They signed to Penalty Recordings in 1996, and released their debut album The War Report, in 1997. The War Report was a commercial and critical success that made the duo well known among hip hop audiences. The album received praise for using the "traditional grimey boom-bap" sound of classic New York City hip hop, which at that time was falling out in favor of a more futuristic sound. The album peaked at #21 on the Billboard 200, and the singles "Illegal Life", "Closer", and "T.O.N.Y. (Top of New York)" all charted on the Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Singles and Tracks chart.


=== 1997–2000: Solo career and debut album ===
Following the release of the album, Capone was again sentenced to a jail term, which left Noreaga to take on a solo career and make an album on his own. Noreaga solo debut studio album N.O.R.E, was released in 1998. The title, a shortening of the artist's name, used the backronym "Niggaz on (the) Run Eatin'". The album became even more successful than the duo's debut, charting at No. 3 on the Billboard 200 and being certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). The album features guest appearances from fellow NYC rappers Nas, Kool G Rap, Big Pun and Busta Rhymes. It also features in many cases a different production style than The War Report, including the modern futuristic sound, with tracks produced by then-up-and-coming producers The Neptunes and Swizz Beatz. The Neptunes produced the hit "Superthug", which reached No. 36 on the Billboard Hot 100 and No. 1 on the Hot Rap Tracks chart. The song, along with Mase's hit "Lookin' At Me", was one of the Neptunes' first major productions.
In 1999, Noreaga would go on to release his second solo album, Melvin Flynt - Da Hustler, which was a moderate success, reaching the top 10 of the Billboard 200 and becoming certified gold by the RIAA. The album's most successful single (produced by The Neptunes) was "Oh No", which reached No. 49 on the Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Singles and Tracks chart. Capone was released from prison in 1999. The two subsequently began recording music together again and released their second C-N-N album in the year 2000. The album, titled The Reunion, was not well-received critically and failed to match the commercial success of the duo's debut or Noreaga's solo albums. AllMusic reviewer Matt Conaway summed up the album by stating "With The Reunion, Capone-N-Noreaga take a step backward." The group would then go on a hiatus and not release another album until 2009.


=== 2001–2007: Name change and reggaeton era ===
Noreaga continued to pursue his career as a solo artist. He officially changed his stage name to N.O.R.E. in the late 1990s [], and after some delays, his third solo studio album God's Favorite, was released in 2002. The album peaked at No. 3 on the Billboard 200 and was later certified platinum. It contained the major hit "Nothin'" (produced by The Neptunes), which reached No. 10 on the Billboard Hot 100. It became N.O.R.E.'s highest-charting hit.
Following God's Favorite, N.O.R.E. changed his musical focus. He began recording Spanish-language songs to reflect his Puerto Rican background and made reggaeton music, rather than traditional hip hop. The reggaeton single "Oye Mi Canto", was released in 2004 and became a major hit, peaking at No. 12 on the Billboard Hot 100. The song was originally supposed to be a single from an upcoming album titled 1 Fan a Day, but the album was never released. Instead, N.O.R.E. released a reggaeton/hip hop album in 2006, titled N.O.R.E. y la Familia...Ya Tú Sabe, which included the lead singles "Oye Mi Canto" and "Mas Maiz". The album, released under Jay-Z's Roc-La-Familia, has both English and Spanish language tracks. It did not chart nearly as well as any of N.O.R.E.'s previous solo albums, as it only reached No. 82 on the Billboard 200. He also is a playable character in Def Jam Vendetta and Def Jam Fight for New York.
N.O.R.E. went on to release two more solo albums. The first, his fifth album Noreality, was released in 2007 and supported by the single "Set It Off", featuring vocals and production from Swizz Beatz. N.O.R.E. released his CD/DVD, Noreality, in September via a joint venture with his own Thugged Out Militainment label and Babygrande Records. The album features guest appearances from Jadakiss, Three 6 Mafia, Kanye West, Pharrell, Mobb Deep's Prodigy, Bun B, Tru Life, David Banner, Kurupt and Capone. Swizz Beatz is among the producers. The DVD, which was available in limited quantities, is based on the rapper's life.The second album S.O.R.E., was controversially released in 2009. N.O.R.E. would go on to denounce S.O.R.E., calling it an album he had nothing to do with and asked fans not to purchase it. The album is a reference to his stage name and his first album which is a backronym for "Niggaz on (the) Run Eatin'", which makes "S.O.R.E.", "Still on (the) Run Eatin'". The term was first used in late 2007, when N.O.R.E. released a song entitled "Still on the Run Eatin'", featuring Lil Wayne. N.O.R.E. said in a video blog that he didn't approve of this album. He also stated the album's artwork was of him at 310 pounds, adding he had lost 62 pounds since then. He also went on to mention five songs on the album were actually handed in, while the rest were pulled off the internet, some of which came from 2007, probably stemming from label financial issues. He later stated he was working on an album known as N.O.R.E. Pt. 2: Born Again, later retitled Student of the Game.


=== 2009–present: Student of the Game ===
In 2009, N.O.R.E. collaborated with Capone once again, to release their third studio album Channel 10, which charted at No. 136 on the Billboard 200. In 2010, a fourth Capone-N-Noreaga album titled The War Report 2, was released. Its lead single was "Hood Pride", featuring Faith Evans. In June 2011, fellow American rapper Busta Rhymes, with whom N.O.R.E. has collaborated several times in the past, stated on his Twitter account that he had officially signed N.O.R.E. to his newly founded record label Conglomerate Records.Between 2009 and 2011, N.O.R.E. teamed up with DJ EFN to host a satellite radio show for Sirius XM called Militainment Crazy Raw Radio, a title that gave equal weight to N.O.R.E.'s Militainment brand, to EFN's Crazy Hood, and to 66 Raw, the channel on Sirius XM which carried the show.In early 2013, Santiago stated that he would yet again change his moniker, this time to P.A.P.I. (Acronym for Power Always Proves Intelligence), which stirred mixed reactions from his fans. On April 16, 2013, he released Student of the Game, and shortly after announced a sequel would be released as his next album.On September 27, 2013, he told MTV that his next album, Melvin Flynt II: Da Final Hustle will be his final album. He stated he will stop touring and releasing solo albums to focus on being a music executive and CEO. On October 30, 2015, Santiago tweeted: "New and last album in July!!!", followed by "Melvin Flynt 2? Or N.O.R.E. 2?".N.O.R.E. reunited with DJ EFN to begin hosting the "Drink Champs" podcast in March 2016. Celebrity hip-hop guests are featured in most episodes, sharing stories and updates while drinking alcohol. The podcast has achieved more than five million listens per month. Since November 2016, the show has been aired on Revolt.


== Legal issues ==
On February 24, 2009, N.O.R.E. was arrested at a Fatburger restaurant in Miami Beach, FL, after a fight with a customer.


== Discography ==

Studio albumsN.O.R.E. (1998)
Melvin Flynt – Da Hustler (1999)
God's Favorite (2002)
N.O.R.E. y la Familia...Ya Tú Sabe  (2006)
Noreality (2007)
Student of the Game (2013)
5E (2018)


== References ==


== External links ==
N.O.R.E. on Discogs
N.O.R.E. at IMDb 
N.O.R.E. Feb 2010 UK radio Interview (CWR Radio)Nasir bin Olu Dara Jones (; born September 14, 1973), better known by his stage name Nas (), is an American rapper. Rooted in East Coast hip hop, he is regarded as one of the greatest rappers of all time. The son of jazz musician Olu Dara, Jones began his musical career in 1989 as he adopted the moniker of "Nasty Nas" and recorded demos for Large Professor. He was later featured on the 1991 song "Live at the Barbeque" by Main Source.
Nas's debut album, Illmatic (1994), received universal acclaim upon release, and is considered to be one of the greatest hip hop albums of all time; in 2020, the album was inducted into the Library of Congress's National Recording Registry. His second album It Was Written (1996) debuted atop the Billboard 200 and sold over a quarter-million units in its first week; the album, along with its single "If I Ruled the World (Imagine That)" (featuring Lauryn Hill), propelled Nas into mainstream success. Both released in 1999, Nas's third and fourth albums I Am and Nastradamus were criticized as inconsistent and too commercially oriented, with critics and audiences fearing a decline in the quality of his output.
From 2001 to 2005, Nas was involved in a highly publicized feud with Jay-Z, popularized by the diss track "Ether". The feud, along with Nas's subsequent albums Stillmatic (2001), God's Son (2002), and the double album Street's Disciple (2004), helped restore his critical standing. Nas later made amends with Jay-Z prior to signing with his then-spearheaded label, Def Jam Recordings in 2006; he adopted a more provocative, politicized direction with the albums Hip Hop Is Dead (2006) and his untitled ninth studio album (2008). In 2010, Nas released Distant Relatives, a collaboration album with Damian Marley, donating all royalties to charities active in Africa. His tenth studio album, Life Is Good (2012), was nominated for Best Rap Album at the 55th Annual Grammy Awards. After receiving thirteen nominations, his twelfth studio album, King's Disease (2020), won him his first Grammy for Best Rap Album at the 63rd Annual Grammy Awards; his subsequent five studio albums: King's Disease II, Magic (2021), King's Disease III (2022), Magic 2 and Magic 3 (2023) would receive generally favorable reception and have production entirely helmed by producer Hit-Boy.
In 2012, The Source ranked him second on their list of the "Top 50 Lyricists of All Time". In 2013, Nas was ranked 4th on MTV's "Hottest MCs in the Game" list. About.com ranked him first on their list of the "50 Greatest MCs of All Time" in 2014, and a year later, Nas was featured on the "10 Best Rappers of All Time" list by Billboard. He is also an entrepreneur through his own record label; he serves as associate publisher of Mass Appeal magazine and the co-founder of Mass Appeal Records.
Nas has released seventeen studio albums since 1994, ten of which are certified gold, platinum or multi-platinum in the U.S.


== Early life ==
Nasir bin Olu Dara Jones was born in the Brooklyn borough of New York City on September 14, 1973, to African American parents. His father, Olu Dara (born Charles Jones III), is a jazz and blues musician from Mississippi. His mother, Fannie Ann (née Little; 1941–2002) was a U.S. Postal Service worker from North Carolina. He has a brother, Jabari Fret, who raps under the name Jungle and is a member of hip hop group Bravehearts. His father adopted the name "Olu Dara" from the Yoruba people. "Nasir" is an Arabic name meaning "helper and protector", while "bin" means "son of" in Arabic. He is a cousin of actors Yara Shahidi and Sayeed Shahidi.As a young child, Nas and his family relocated to the Queensbridge housing project of the Long Island City community area in the borough of Queens. His neighbor, Willy "Ill Will" Graham, influenced his interest in hip hop by playing him records. His parents divorced in 1985, and he dropped out of school after the eighth grade. He educated himself about African culture through the Five-Percent Nation (a splinter group of the Nation of Islam) and the Nuwaubian Nation. In his early years, he played the trumpet and began writing his own rhymes.


== Career ==
As a teenager, Nas enlisted his best friend and upstairs neighbor Willie "Ill Will" Graham as his DJ. Nas initially went by the nickname "Kid Wave" before adopting his more commonly known alias of "Nasty Nas". In 1989, then-16-year-old Nas met up with producer Large Professor and went to the studio where Rakim and Kool G Rap were recording their albums. When they were not in the recording studio, Nas would go into the booth and record his own material. However, none of it was ever released.


=== 1991–1994: The beginnings and Illmatic ===
In 1991, Nas performed on Main Source's "Live at the Barbeque", also produced by Large Professor. In mid-1992, Nas was approached by MC Serch of 3rd Bass, who became his manager and secured Nas a record deal with Columbia Records during the same year. Nas made his solo debut under the name of "Nasty Nas" on the single "Halftime" from MC Serch's soundtrack for the film Zebrahead. Called the new Rakim, his rhyming skills attracted a significant amount of attention within the hip hop community.
In 1994, Nas's debut album, Illmatic, was released. It featured production from Large Professor, Pete Rock, Q-Tip, LES and DJ Premier, as well as guest appearances from Nas's friend AZ and his father Olu Dara. The album spawned several singles, including "The World Is Yours", "It Ain't Hard to Tell", and "One Love". Shaheem Reid of MTV News called Illmatic "the first classic LP" of 1994. In 1994, Nas also recorded the song "One on One" for the soundtrack to the film Street Fighter. In his book To the Break of Dawn: A Freestyle on the Hip Hop Aesthetic, William Jelani Cobb writes of Nas's impact at the time:

Nas, the poetic sage of the Queensbridge projects, was hailed as the second coming of Rakim—as if the first had reached his expiration date. [...] Nas never became 'the next Rakim,' nor did he really have to. Illmatic stood on its own terms. The sublime lyricism of the CD, combined with the fact that it was delivered into the crucible of the boiling East-West conflict, quickly solidified [his] reputation as the premier writer of his time.
Illmatic was awarded best album of 1994 by The Source. Steve Huey of AllMusic described Nas's lyrics on Illmatic as "highly literate" and his raps "superbly fluid regardless of the size of his vocabulary", adding that Nas is "able to evoke the bleak reality of ghetto life without losing hope or forgetting the good times". About.com ranked Illmatic as the greatest hip hop album of all time, and Prefix magazine praised it as "the best hip hop record ever made".


=== 1994–1998: Transition to mainstream direction and the Firm ===
In 1995, Nas did guest performances on the albums Doe or Die by AZ, The Infamous by Mobb Deep, Only Built 4 Cuban Linx by Raekwon and 4,5,6 by Kool G Rap. Nas also parted ways with manager MC Serch, enlisted Steve Stoute, and began preparation for his second album, It Was Written. The album was chiefly produced by Tone and Poke of the Trackmasters, as Nas consciously worked towards a crossover-oriented sound. Columbia Records had begun to pressure Nas to work towards more commercial topics, such as that of The Notorious B.I.G. and had become successful by releasing street singles that still retained radio-friendly appeal. The album also expanded on Nas's Escobar persona, who lived a Scarface/Casino-esque lifestyle. On the other hand, references to Scarface protagonist Tony Montana notwithstanding, Illmatic was more about his early life growing up in the projects.It Was Written was released in mid-1996. Two singles, "If I Ruled the World (Imagine That)" (featuring Lauryn Hill of The Fugees) and "Street Dreams" (including a remix with R. Kelly), were instant hits. These songs were promoted by big-budget music videos directed by Hype Williams, making Nas a common name among mainstream hip-hop. Reviewing It Was Written, Leo Stanley of Allmusic believed the album's rhymes were not as complex as those of Illmatic, but still thought Nas had "deepened his talents, creating a complex series of rhymes that not only flow, but manage to tell coherent stories as well." It Was Written featured the debut of the Firm, a supergroup consisting of Nas, AZ, Foxy Brown, and Cormega.Signed to Dr. Dre's Aftermath Entertainment label, the Firm began working on their debut album. Halfway through the production of the album, Cormega was fired from the group by Steve Stoute, who had unsuccessfully attempted to force Cormega to sign a deal with his management company. Cormega subsequently became one of Nas's most vocal opponents and released a number of underground hip hop singles dissing Nas, Stoute, and Nature, who replaced Cormega as the fourth member of the Firm. Nas, Foxy Brown, AZ, and Nature Present The Firm: The Album was finally released in 1997 to mixed reviews. The album failed to live up to its expected sales despite being certified platinum, and the members of the group disbanded to go their separate ways.During this period, Nas was one of four rappers (the others being B-Real, KRS-One and RBX) in the hip-hop supergroup Group Therapy, who appeared on the song "East Coast/West Coast Killas" from Dr. Dre Presents the Aftermath.


=== 1998–2001: Heightened commercial direction and inconsistent output ===
In late 1998, Nas began working on a double album, to be entitled I Am... The Autobiography; he intended it as the middle ground between Illmatic and It Was Written, with each track detailing a part of his life. In 1998, Nas co-wrote and starred in Hype Williams's feature film Belly. I Am... The Autobiography was completed in early 1999, and a music video was shot for its lead single, "Nas Is Like". It was produced by DJ Premier and contained vocal samples from "It Ain't Hard to Tell". Music critic M.F. DiBella noticed that Nas also covered "politics, the state of hip-hop, Y2K, race, and religion with his own unique perspective" in the album besides autobiographical lyrics. Much of the LP was leaked into MP3 format onto the Internet, and Nas and Stoute quickly recorded enough substitute material to constitute a single-disc release.The second single on I Am... was "Hate Me Now", featuring Sean "Puffy" Combs, which was used as an example by Nas's critics accusing him of moving towards more commercial themes. The video featured Nas and Combs being crucified in a manner similar to Jesus Christ; after the video was completed, Combs requested his crucifixion scene be edited out of the video. However, the unedited copy of the "Hate Me Now" video made its way to MTV. Within minutes of the broadcast, Combs and his bodyguards allegedly made their way into Steve Stoute's office and assaulted him, at one point apparently hitting Stoute over the head with a champagne bottle. Stoute pressed charges, but he and Combs settled out-of-court that June. Columbia had scheduled to release the infringed material from I Am... under the title Nastradamus during the later half of 1999, but, at the last minute, Nas decided to record an entire new album for the 1999 release of Nastradamus. Nastradamus was therefore rushed to meet a November release date. Though critical reviews were unfavorable, it did result in a minor hit, "You Owe Me". Fans and critics feared that Nas's career was declining, artistically and commercially, as both I Am... and Nastradamus were criticized as inconsistent and overtly-commercialized.In 2000, Nas & Ill Will Records Presents QB's Finest, which is popularly known as simply QB's Finest, was released on Nas's Ill Will Records. QB's Finest is a compilation album that featured Nas and a number of other rappers from Queensbridge projects, including Mobb Deep, Nature, Capone, the Bravehearts, Tragedy Khadafi, Millennium Thug and Cormega, who had briefly reconciled with Nas. The album also featured guest appearances from Queensbridge hip-hop legends Roxanne Shanté, MC Shan, and Marley Marl. Shan and Marley Marl both appeared on the lead single "Da Bridge 2001", which was based on Shan & Marl's 1986 recording "The Bridge".


=== 2001–2006: Feud with Jay-Z, Stillmatic, God's Son, and double album ===
After trading veiled criticisms on various songs, freestyles and mixtape appearances, the highly publicised dispute between Nas and Jay-Z became widely known to the public in 2001. Jay-Z, in his song "Takeover", criticised Nas by calling him "fake" and his career "lame". Nas responded with "Ether", in which he compared Jay-Z to such characters as J.J. Evans from the sitcom Good Times and cigarette company mascot Joe Camel. The song was included on Nas's fifth studio album, Stillmatic, released in December 2001. His daughter, Destiny, is listed as an executive producer on  Stillmatic so she could receive royalty checks from the album. Stillmatic peaked at No. 5 on the U.S. Billboard 200 chart and featured the singles "Got Ur Self A..." and "One Mic".
In response to "Ether", Jay-Z released the song "Supa Ugly", which Hot 97 radio host Angie Martinez premiered on December 11, 2001. In the song, Jay-Z explicitly boasts about having an affair with Nas's girlfriend, Carmen Bryan. New York City hip-hop radio station Hot 97 issued a poll asking listeners which rapper made the better diss song; Nas won with 58% while Jay-Z got 42% of the votes. In 2002, in the midst of the dispute between the two New York rappers, Eminem cited both Nas and Jay-Z as being two of the best MCs in the industry, in his song 'Till I Collapse. Both the dispute and Stillmatic signaled an artistic comeback for Nas after a string of inconsistent albums. The Lost Tapes, a compilation of previously unreleased or bootlegged songs from 1998 to 2001, was released by Columbia in September 2002. The collection attained respectable sales and received rave reviews from critics.In December 2002, Nas released the God's Son album including its lead single, "Made You Look" which used a pitched down sample of the Incredible Bongo Band's "Apache". The album peaked at No. 12 on the Billboard Hot 100 and No. 1 on the Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums charts despite widespread Internet bootlegging. Time Magazine named his album best hip-hop album of the year. Vibe gave it four stars and The Source gave it four mics. The second single, "I Can", which reworked elements from Beethoven's "Für Elise", became Nas's biggest hit to date in 2003, garnering substantial radio airplay on urban, rhythmic, and top 40 radio stations, as well as on the MTV and VH1 music video networks. God's Son also includes several songs dedicated to Nas's mother, who died of cancer in April 2002, including "Dance". In 2003, Nas was featured on the Korn song "Play Me", from Korn's Take a Look in the Mirror LP. Also in 2003, a live performance in New York City, featuring Ludacris, Jadakiss, and Darryl McDaniels (of Run-D.M.C. fame), was released on DVD as Made You Look: God's Son Live.God's Son was critical in the power struggle between Nas and Jay-Z in the hip-hop industry at the time. In an article at the time, Joseph Jones of PopMatters stated, "Whether you like it or not, "Ether" did this. With God's Son, Nas has the opportunity to cement his status as the King of NY, at least for another 3-4-year term, or he could prove that he is not the savior that hip-hop fans should be pinning their hopes on." After the album's release, he began helping the Bravehearts, an act including his younger brother Jungle and friend Wiz (Wizard), put together their debut album, Bravehearted. The album featured guest appearances from Nas, Nashawn (Millennium Thug), Lil Jon, and Jully Black.
Nas released his seventh album Street's Disciple, a sprawling double album, on November 30, 2004. It addressed subject matter both political and personal, including his impending marriage to recording artist Kelis. The double-sided single "Thief's Theme"/"You Know My Style" was released months before the album's release, followed by the single "Bridging the Gap" upon the album's release. Although Street's Disciple went platinum, it served as a drop-off from Nas's previous commercial successes.In 2005, New York-based rapper 50 Cent dissed Nas on his song "Piggy Bank", which brought his reputation into question in hip-hop circles. In October, Nas made a surprise appearance at Jay-Z's "I Declare War" concert, where they reconciled their beef. At the show, Jay-Z announced to the crowd, "It's bigger than 'I Declare War'. Let's go, Esco!" and Nas then joined him onstage, and the two performed Jay-Z's "Dead Presidents" (1996) together, a song that featured a prominent sample of Nas's 1994 track, "The World Is Yours" (1994).


=== 2006–2008: Hip Hop Is Dead, Untitled, and politicized efforts ===
The reconciliation between Nas and Jay-Z created the opportunity for Nas to sign a deal with Def Jam Recordings, of which Jay-Z was president at the time. Jay-Z signed Nas on January 23, 2006; the signing included an agreement that Nas was to be paid about $3,000,000, including a recording budget, for each of his first two albums with Def Jam.Tentatively called Hip Hop Is Dead...The N, Hip Hop Is Dead was a commentary on the state of hip-hop and featured "Black Republican", a hyped collaboration with Jay-Z. The album debuted on Def Jam and Nas new imprint at that label, The Jones Experience, at No. 1 on the Billboard 200 charts, selling 355,000 copies—Nas's third number one album, along with It Was Written and I Am.... It also inspired reactions about the state of hip-hop, particularly controversy with Southern hip hop artists who felt the album's title was a criticism aimed at them. Nas's 2004 song, "Thief's Theme", was featured in the 2006 film, The Departed. Nas's former label, Columbia Records, released the compilation Greatest Hits in November.On October 12, 2007, Nas announced that his next album would be called Nigger. Both progressive commentators, such as Jesse Jackson and Al Sharpton, and the conservative-aligned news channel Fox News were outraged; Jackson called on entertainers to stop using the epithet after comedian Michael Richards used it onstage in late 2006. Controversy escalated as the album's impending release date drew nearer, going as far as to spark rumors that Def Jam was planning to drop Nas unless he changed the title. Additionally, then-Fort Greene, Brooklyn assemblyman (later United States Representative) Hakeem Jeffries requested that New York State Comptroller Thomas DiNapoli withdraw $84,000,000 from the state pension fund that had been invested into Universal and its parent company, Vivendi, if the album's title was not changed. On the opposite side of the spectrum, many of the most famous names in the entertainment industry supported Nas for using the racial epithet as the title of his full-length LP. Nas's management worried the album would not be sold by chain stores such as Wal-Mart, thus limiting its distribution.On May 19, 2008, Nas decided to forgo an album title. Responding to Jesse Jackson's remarks and use of the word "nigger", Nas called him "the biggest player hater", stating "His time is up. All you old niggas' time is up. We heard your voice, we saw your marching, we heard your sermons. We don't want to hear that shit no more. It's a new day. It's a new voice. I'm here now. We don't need Jesse; I'm here. I got this. We the voice now. It's no more Jesse. Sorry. Goodbye. You ain't helping nobody in the 'hood and that's the bottom line." He also said of the album's title: "It's important to me that this album gets to the fans. It's been a long time coming. I want my fans to know that creatively and lyrically, they can expect the same content and the same messages. The people will always know what the real title of this album is and what to call it."The album was ultimately released on July 15, 2008, untitled. It featured production from Polow da Don, stic.man of Dead Prez, Sons of Light and J. Myers, "Hero", the album's lead single released on June 23, 2008, reached No. 97 on the Billboard Hot 100 and No. 87 on the Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Singles & Tracks. In July, Nas attained a shoe deal with Fila. In an interview with MTV News in July, Nas speculated that he might release two albums: one produced by DJ Premier and another by Dr. Dre—simultaneously the same day. Nas worked on Dr. Dre's studio album Detox. Nas was also awarded 'Emcee of the Year' in the HipHopDX 2008 Awards for his latest solo effort, the quality of his appearances on other albums and was described as having "become an artist who thrives off of reinvention and going against the system."


=== 2009–2012: Distant Relatives and Life Is Good ===
At the 2009 Grammy Awards, Nas confirmed he was collaborating on an album with reggae singer Damian Marley which was expected to be released in late 2009. Nas said of the collaboration in an interview "I was a big fan of his father and of course all the children, all the offspring, and Damian, I kind of looked at Damian as a rap guy. His stuff is not really singing, or if he does, it comes off more hard, like on some street shit. I always liked how reggae and hip-hop have always been intertwined and always kind of pushed each other, I always liked the connection. I'd worked with people before from the reggae world but when I worked with Damian, the whole workout was perfect". A portion of the profit was planned to go towards building a school in Africa. He went on to say that it was "too early to tell the title or anything like that". The Los Angeles Times reported that the album would be titled Distant Relatives.
Nas also revealed that he would begin working on his tenth studio album following the release of Distant Relatives. During late 2009, Nas used his live band Mulatto with music director Dustin Moore for concerts in Europe and Australia.After announcing a possible release in 2010, a follow-up compilation to The Lost Tapes (2002) was delayed indefinitely due to issues between him and Def Jam. His eleventh studio album, Life Is Good (2012) was produced primarily by Salaam Remi and No I.D, and released on July 13, 2012. Nas called the album a "magic moment" in his rap career.In 2011, Nas announced that he would release collaboration albums with Mobb Deep, Common, and a third with DJ Premier. Common said of the project in a 2011 interview, "At some point, we will do that. We'd talked about it and we had a good idea to call it Nas.Com. That was actually going to be a mixtape at one point. But we decided that we should make it an album." Life is Good would be nominated for Best Rap Album at the 2013 Grammy Awards.


=== 2013–2019: Nasir and The Lost Tapes 2 ===
In January 2013, Nas announced he had begun working on his twelfth studio album, which would be his final album for Def Jam. The album was supposed to be released during 2015. In October 2013, DJ Premier said that his collaboration album with Nas, would be released following his twelfth studio album. In October 2013, Nas confirmed that a rumored song "Sinatra in the Sands" featuring Jay-Z, Justin Timberlake, and Timbaland would be featured on the album.On April 16, 2014, on the twentieth anniversary of Illmatic, the documentary Nas: Time Is Illmatic was premiered which recounted circumstances leading up to Nas's debut album. It was reported on September 10, that Nas has finished his last album with Def Jam. On October 30, Nas released a song which might have been the first single on his new album, titled "The Season", produced by J Dilla. Nas has also collaborated with the Australian hip-hop group, Bliss n Eso, in 2014. They released the track "I Am Somebody" in May 2014. Nas was featured on the song "We Are" from Justin Bieber's fourth studio album, Purpose, released in November 2015.

Nas was announced as one of the executive producers of the Netflix original series, The Get Down, prior to its release in August 2016. He narrated the series and rapped as adult Ezekiel of 1996.
On October 16, 2016, he received the Jimmy Iovine Icon Award at 2016 REVOLT Music Conference for having a lasting impact and unique influence on music, numerous years in the rap business, his partnership with Hennessy, and Mass Appeal imprint by Puff Daddy. In November 2016, Nas collaborated with Lin-Manuel Miranda, Dave East and Aloe Blacc on a song called "Wrote My Way Out", which appears on The Hamilton Mixtape. On April 12, 2017, Nas released the song Angel Dust as soundtrack for TV series The Getdown. It contains a sample of the Gil Scott-Heron and Brian Jackson song Angel Dust.In June 2017, Nas appeared in the award-winning 2017 documentary The American Epic Sessions directed by Bernard MacMahon, where he recorded live direct-to-disc on the restored first electrical sound recording system from the 1920s. He performed "On the Road Again", a 1928 song by the Memphis Jug Band, which received universal acclaim with The Hollywood Reporter describing his performance as "fantastic" and the Financial Times praising his "superb cover of the Memphis Jug Band's "On the Road Again", exposing the hip-hop blueprint within the 1928 stomper." "On the Road Again", and a performance of "One Mic", were released on Music from The American Epic Sessions: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack on June 9, 2017.In April 2018, Kanye West announced on Twitter that Nas's twelfth studio album will be released on June 15, also serving as executive producer for the album. The album was announced the day before release, titled Nasir.
Following the release of Nasir, Nas confirmed he would return to completing a previous album, including production from Swizz Beatz and RZA. This project was released as The Lost Tapes 2 on July 19, 2019, which included production from Kanye West, Pharrell Williams, Swizz Beatz, The Alchemist, and RZA. This album was a sequel to Nas's 2002 release, The Lost Tapes.


=== 2020–present: King's Disease series and Magic series ===
In August 2020, Nas announced that he would be releasing his 13th album. On August 13, he revealed the album's title, King's Disease. The album, executive-produced by Hit-Boy, was preceded by the lead single, "Ultra Black", a song detailing perseverance and pride "despite the system". The album won the Grammy Award for Best Rap Album at the 63rd Annual Grammy Awards, becoming Nas' first Grammy. The sequel album, King's Disease II, was released on August 6, 2021, and included the song "Nobody" featuring Lauryn Hill. King's Disease II debuted at number-three on the US Billboard 200, becoming Nas's highest-charting album since 2012. On December 24, Nas released the album Magic. It is his third album executive produced by Hit-Boy, and includes guest appearances from ASAP Rocky and DJ Premier.Nas's third installment in the King's Disease series, King's Disease III, was released the following year. Like its two predecessors, King's Disease III was mainly produced by Hit-Boy; however, it was notably Nas's first studio album to forgo any guest appearances from outside artists. Upon release, King's Disease III would become one of the most critically acclaimed albums of Nas's career, becoming his highest-scoring new studio album on review aggregator Metacritic and receiving critical praise for the cohesion of Hit-Boy's production with Nas's storytelling and lyricism. Praising King's Disease III, British music publication NME stated that Nas, "three decades in, [is] still a force to be reckoned with", while Marcus Shorter of Consequence would write that the album was Nas's and Hit-Boy's "most focused and confident collaboration" and that Nas was "at peace with his legacy, life, and the fact that old age is inevitable".On September 12, 2023, Nas announced the 3rd installment to the Magic album series, Magic 3, which would be released two days later, on his fiftieth birthday.  The album would be the sixth and final collaboration between Nas and Hit-Boy on an album.


== Artistry ==
Nas has been praised for his ability to create a "devastating match between lyrics and production" by journalist Peter Shapiro, as well as creating a "potent evocation of life on the street", and he has even been compared to Rakim for his lyrical technique. In his book Book of Rhymes: The Poetics of Hip Hop (2009), writer Adam Bradley states, "Nas is perhaps contemporary rap's greatest innovator in storytelling. His catalog includes songs narrated before birth ('Fetus') and after death ('Amongst Kings'), biographies ('UBR [Unauthorized Biography of Rakim]') and autobiographies ('Doo Rags'), allegorical tales ('Money Is My Bitch') and epistolary ones ('One Love'), he's rapped in the voice of a woman ('Sekou Story') and even of a gun ('I Gave You Power')." Robert Christgau writes that "Nas has been transfiguring [gangsta rap] since Illmatic". Kool Moe Dee notes that Nas has an "off-beat conversational flow" in his book There's a God on the Mic – he says: "before Nas, every MC focused on rhyming with a cadence that ultimately put the words that rhymed on beat with the snare drum. Nas created a style of rapping that was more conversational than ever before".OC of D.I.T.C. comments in the book How to Rap: "Nas did the song backwards ['Rewind']... that was a brilliant idea". Also in How to Rap, 2Mex of The Visionaries describes Nas's flow as "effervescent", Rah Digga says Nas's lyrics have "intricacy", Bootie Brown of The Pharcyde explains that Nas does not always have to make words rhyme as he is "charismatic", and Nas is also described as having a "densely packed" flow, with compound rhymes that "run over from one beat into the next or even into another bar".About.com ranked him 1st on their list of the "50 Greatest MCs of All Time" in 2014, and a year later, Nas was featured on the "10 Best Rappers of All Time" list by Billboard. The Source ranked him No. 2 on their list of the Top 50 Lyricists of All Time. In 2013, Nas was ranked fourth on MTV's "Hottest MCs in the Game" list. His debut, Illmatic, is widely considered among the greatest hip hop albums of all time.


== Controversies and feuds ==


=== 2Pac ===
After 2Pac interpreted lines directed to the Notorious B.I.G. on Nas's 1996 album It Was Written to be aimed towards him, he attacked Nas on the track "Against All Odds" from The Don Killuminati: The 7 Day Theory. Nas himself later admitted he was brought to tears when he heard the diss because he idolized 2Pac. The two later met in Central Park before the 1996 MTV Video Music Awards and ended their feud, with 2Pac promising to remove any disses aimed at Nas from the official album release; however, 2Pac was shot four times in a drive-by shooting in Las Vegas, Nevada, three days later on September 7, dying of his wounds on September 13, before any edits to the album could be made.


=== Jay-Z ===
Initially friends, Nas and Jay-Z had met a number of times in the 1990s with no animosity between the two. Jay-Z requested that Nas appear on his 1996 album Reasonable Doubt on the track "Bring it On"; however, Nas never showed up to the studio and was not included on the album. In response to this, Jay-Z asked producer Ski Beatz to sample a line from Nas's song The World is Yours, with the sample featured heavily in what went on to be Dead Presidents II. The two traded subliminal responses for the next couple of years, until the beef was escalated further in 2001 after Jay-Z publicly addressed Nas at the Summer Jam, performing what would go on to be known as "Takeover", ending the performance by saying "ask Nas, he don't want it with Hov". After Jay-Z eventually released the song on his 2001 album The Blueprint, Nas responded with the song "Ether", from his album Stillmatic, with both fans and critics saying that the song had effectively saved Nas's career and marked his return to prominence, and almost unanimously agreeing Nas had won their feud. Jay-Z responded with a freestyle over the instrumental to Nas's "Got Ur Self a Gun", known as "Supa Ugly". In the song, Jay-Z makes reference to Nas's girlfriend and daughter, going into graphic detail about having an affair with his girlfriend. Jay-Z's mother was personally disgusted by the song, and demanded he apologise to Nas and his family, which he did in December 2001 on Hot 97. Supa Ugly marked the last direct diss song between Jay-Z and Nas, however, the two continued to trade subliminals on their subsequent releases. The feud was officially brought to an end in 2005, when Jay-Z and Nas performed on stage together in a surprise concert also featuring P Diddy, Kanye West and Beanie Sigel. The following year, Nas signed with Def Jam Recordings, of which Jay-Z then served as president.


=== Cam'ron ===
After Nas was removed from the 2002 Summer Jam lineup due to allegedly planning to perform the song Ether while a mock lynching of a Jay-Z effigy took place behind him, Cam'ron was announced as a last minute replacement and headlined the show instead. Nas appeared on Power 105.1 days later and addressed a number of fellow artists, including Nelly, Noreaga and Cam'ron himself. Nas praised Cam'ron as a good lyricist, but branded his album Come Home With Me as "wack". After Cam'ron heard of Nas's words, he appeared on Funkmaster Flex's Hot 97 and performed a freestyle diss over the beat to Nas's "Hate Me Now", making reference to Nas's mother, baby mother and daughter. Nas did not respond directly but appeared on the radio days later, calling Cam'ron a "dummy" for supposedly being used by Hot 97 to generate ratings. Nas eventually responded on his 2002 album God's Son on the song "Zone Out", claiming Cam'ron had HIV. Cam'ron and the rest of The Diplomats, specifically Jim Jones continued to attack Nas throughout 2003, on numerous mixtapes, albums and radio freestyles, however, the feud between the two slowly died down and they eventually reconciled in 2014.


=== Young Jeezy ===
After Nas blamed Southern hip hop as the cause of the perceived artistic decline of the genre on his 2006 single "Hip Hop Is Dead", from the album of the same name, his then-Def Jam labelmate Young Jeezy took offense by claiming that Nas had "no street credibility" and vowing his album The Inspiration would outsell Hip Hop is Dead, which were released one week apart from each other in December 2006. After failing to do so, Young Jeezy took back his disses towards Nas, and the two later collaborated on the 2008 hit single "My President".


=== Lijadu Sisters ===
On his 2006 mixtape, The Prophecy, Vol 2: The Beginning of the N, Nas had a track titled "Life's Gone Low". It was a substantial sampling of "Life's Gone Down Low", a song released by Nigerian musician twin Lijadu Sisters in their 1976 Danger album. Nas lifted vocal hooks and the entire beats from the duo's work. Nas neither obtained clearance nor did he credit the Sisters for the reuse. Reacting to the issue, the Lijadu Sisters were reported to have said: "We can't forgive him," but "If other people want to use your stuff, that tells that you did something good."


=== Bill O'Reilly and Virginia Tech controversy ===
On September 6, 2007, Nas performed at a free concert for the Virginia Tech student body and faculty, following the school shooting there. He was joined by John Mayer, Alan Jackson, Phil Vassar, and Dave Matthews Band. When announced that Nas was to perform, political commentator Bill O'Reilly and Fox News denounced the concert and called for Nas's removal, citing "violent" lyrics on songs such as "Shoot 'Em Up", "Got Urself a Gun", and "Made You Look". During his "Talking Points Memo" segment for August 15, 2007, an argument erupted in which O'Reilly claimed that it was not only Nas's lyrical content that made him inappropriate for the event, citing the gun conviction on Nas's criminal record.On September 6, 2007, during his set at "A Concert for Virginia Tech", Nas twice referred to Bill O'Reilly as "a chump", prompting loud cheers by members of the crowd. About two weeks later, Nas was interviewed by Shaheem Reid of MTV News, where he criticised O'Reilly, calling him uncivilized and willing to go to extremes for publicity. Responding to O'Reilly, Nas, in an interview with MTV News, said:

He doesn't understand the younger generation. He deals with the past. The people he represents are Republican, older, a generation that has nothing to do with the reality of what's happening now with my generation. ... He's not really on my radar. People like him are supposed to be taught and people like me are supposed to let niggas like him know. I don't take him serious. His shit is all about getting facts twisted or whatever. I wouldn't honor anything Bill O'Reilly has to say. It just shows you what bloodsuckers like him do: They abuse something like the Virginia Tech tragedy for show ratings. You can't talk to a person like that.
On July 23, 2008, Nas appeared on The Colbert Report to discuss his opinion of O'Reilly and Fox News, which he accused of bias against the African-American community and re-challenged O'Reilly to a debate. During the appearance, Nas sat on boxes of more than 625,000 signatures gathered by online advocacy organisation Color of Change in support of a petition accusing Fox of race-baiting and fear-mongering.


=== Doja Cat ===
In 2020, after Doja Cat faced accusations of participating in racist conversations on the internet, Nas referenced her in his song "Ultra Black"; in the song, Nas describes himself as "unapologetically black, the opposite of Doja Cat". The response to the lyric was mixed, with some defending his right to criticize her, and others resurfacing allegations that he verbally abused his ex-wife, Kelis. Doja Cat shrugged off the namedrop, jokingly referencing the lyric in a TikTok video. In an interview with Fat Joe, Doja Cat said that she has no interest in "beefing" with Nas saying  "I fucking love Nas, thank fucking god he noticed me. I love Nas. So I don't give a shit. He can say whatever he wants. I really don't care". Nas later claimed that the line was not meant to be perceived as a "diss", and that he was "just trying to find another word that worked with the scheme of the song."


== Business ventures ==
On April 10, 2013, Nas invested an undisclosed six-figure sum into Mass Appeal magazine, where he went on to serve as the publication's associate publisher, joined by creative firm Decon and White Owl Capital Partners. In June 2013, he opened his own sneaker store.In September 2013, he invested in a technology startup company, a job search appmaker called Proven. In 2014, Nas invested as part of a $2.8M round in viral video startup ViralGains another addition to Queens-bridge venture partners portfolio.Nas has a partnership with Hennessy and has been working with their "Wild Rabbit" campaign.In May 2014, Nas partnered with job placement startup Koru to fund a scholarship for 10 college graduates to go through Koru's training program. Nas will also be joining the startup as a guest coach. Nas is a co-owner of a Cloud-based service LANDR, an automated, drag-and-drop digital audio postproduction tool which automates "mastering", the final stage in audio production. In June 2015, Nas joined forces with New York City soul food restaurant Sweet Chick. He plans to expand the restaurant brand nationally. The Los Angeles location opened in April 2017. He owns his own clothing line called HSTRY.In June 2018, Nas was paid $40 million after Amazon acquired the doorbell company Ring Inc. as well as PillPack – the latter of which he invested in via his investment firm, Queensbridge Venture Partners.He has continued to invest heavily in technology startups including Dropbox, Lyft, and Robinhood.


== Personal life ==
Nas is a spokesperson and mentor for P'Tones Records, a non-profit after-school music program with the mission "to create constructive opportunities for urban youth through no-cost music programs."On March 15, 2012, Nas became the first rapper to have a personal verified account on Genius, where he explains his own lyrics and occasionally comments on lyrics from other rappers he admires.In May 2013, it was announced that Nas would open a sneaker store in Las Vegas called 12 am RUN (pronounced Midnight Run) as part of The LINQ retail development.In July 2013, Harvard University established the Nasir Jones Hip-Hop Fellowship, to fund scholars and artists who show potential and creativity in the arts in connection to hip hop.On November 12, 2019, Nas was honored by Haute Living, along with Watches of Switzerland and Hennessy, in a celebratory affair that included a violin rendition of iconic Nas songs performed by Edward W. Hardy.Nas is a fan of his hometown baseball team the New York Mets and English soccer team Everton FC.


=== Relationships and family ===
In the spring of 2002, Nas lost his mother to cancer. She died in his arms.On June 15, 1994, Nas's ex-fiancée, Carmen Bryant, gave birth to their daughter, Destiny.In January 2005, Nas married R&B singer Kelis in Atlanta after a two-year relationship. On April 30, 2009, a spokesperson confirmed that Kelis filed for divorce, citing irreconcilable differences. Kelis gave birth to Nas's first son on July 21, 2009, although the event was soured by a disagreement which ended in Nas announcing the birth of his son, Knight, at a gig in Queens, New York, against Kelis's wishes. The birth was also announced by Nas via an online video. The couple's divorce was finalized on May 21, 2010. Their divorce was visually reflected in Nas' song, "Bye Baby", and in the music video with him holding his ex-wife's green wedding dress in a black leather chair, which would also be the backdrop of the album cover for Life Is Good (2012). In 2018, Kelis accused Nas of being physically and mentally abusive during their marriage. Nas replied to the accusations on social media, accusing Kelis of attempting to slander him in the time of a custody battle and accusing Kelis of abusing his daughter, Destiny.Nas also briefly dated Mary J. Blige and Nicki Minaj respectively.In an October 2014 episode of PBS's Finding Your Roots, Nas learned about five generations of his ancestry. His great-great-great-grandmother, Pocahontas Little, was an enslaved woman who was sold for $830. When host Henry Louis Gates showed Nas her bill of sale and told him more about the man who bought her, Nas remarked that he is considering buying the land where the slave owner lived. Nas was also shown the marriage certificate of his great-great-great-grandmother, Pocahontas, and great-great-great-grandfather, Calvin.


== Legal situations ==
In September 2009 the U.S. Internal Revenue Service filed a federal tax lien against Nas for over $2.5 million, seeking unpaid taxes dating back to 2006. By early 2011 this figure had ballooned to over $6.4 million. Early in 2012 reports emerged that the IRS had filed papers in Georgia to garnish a portion of Nas's earnings from material published under BMI and ASCAP, until his delinquent tax bill is settled.In January 2012, Nas was involved in a dispute with a concert promoter in Angola, having accepted $300,000 for a concert in Luanda, Angola's capital for New Year's Eve and then not showing up. American promoter Patrick Allocco and his son, who arranged for Nas's concert, were detained at gunpoint and taken to an Angolan jail by the local promoter who fronted the $300,000 for the concert. Only after the U.S. Embassy intervened were the promoter and his son allowed to leave jail—but were placed under house arrest at their hotel. By the end of the month Nas had returned all $300,000, and, after 49 days of travel ban, Allocco and his son were both released.


== Discography ==

Studio albums
Collaboration albumsThe Album (with The Firm) (1997)
Distant Relatives (with Damian Marley) (2010)


== Filmography ==


== Awards and nominations ==


=== Grammy Awards ===
The Grammy Awards are held annually by the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences. Nas has won one Grammy out of 16 nominations altogether.


=== News and Documentary Emmy Awards ===


=== Sports Emmy Awards ===


=== MTV Video Music Awards ===


=== BET Hip Hop Awards ===


== References ==


== Further reading ==


== External links ==

Nas at AllMusic
Nas at IMDb
Nas on SpotifyTariq Amar Devega (born July 26, 1990), better known by his stage name ASAP Nast (stylized as A$AP Nast), is an American rapper, songwriter and model from Harlem, New York. Nast is best known as a member of the hip hop collective A$AP Mob. As part of A$AP Mob, they released their first project as a group, a mixtape titled Lord$ Never Worry in 2012. His breakout song, "Trillmatic" featuring Wu-Tang Clan's Method Man was released on December 4, 2013.


== Early life and education ==
ASAP Nast was raised in West Harlem, New York City on 116th and Morningside Avenue, and frequently spent time with his cousin ASAP Rocky when they were children. When Rocky moved to The Bronx as a teen, the two lost contact, but were reunited by ASAP Bari, one of ASAP Mob's founding members. Nast went to Martin Luther King, Jr. High School in Manhattan but dropped out before  graduating  to pursue a  career in music. After dropping out of high school, he worked at the sneaker store Atmos.


== Musical career ==


=== 2007–12: Career beginnings with ASAP Mob ===
ASAP Nast was one of the first members to join the hip hop collective ASAP Mob, that was formed by ASAP Yams, ASAP Bari and ASAP Illz in Harlem during 2007. He was originally known by the name New York Nast, however he adjusted his stage name to include the ASAP prefix, as all the other Mob members have; aside from Dash. Nast made his official debut on ASAP Rocky's early song "Uptown" and then he appeared on two Live.Love.ASAP songs, "Purple Swag: Chapter 2" and "Trilla".On August 27, 2012, ASAP Mob released their debut project, a mixtape titled Lords Never Worry, as a free download. Nast appeared on four of the mixtape's tracks, including the standout "Black Mane". Following the mixtape's release, Nast toured with the rest of ASAP Mob. Throughout that tour they performed 48 shows in 61 days, the majority of which were sold out.


=== 2013–14: L.O.R.D. ===
Singer Tinashe released the remix to her song "Who Am I Working For?" on April 16, 2013, featuring Nast. In July 2013, ASAP Ferg announced that ASAP Mob would release their debut album after the release of his solo debut album Trap Lord. During October 2013, ASAP Nast along with ASAP Rocky, Ferg, Twelvy and Ant, participated in the ASAP Mob's cypher during the 2013 BET Hip Hop Awards. On December 3, 2013, it was announced that the album would be released on March 4, 2014. The following day, the album's first single, "Trillmatic" by ASAP Nast, was released along with an accompanying music video. The single, produced by ASAP Ty Beats, features a verse from American rapper and New York City-native, Wu-Tang Clan's Method Man. It had previously been previewed at the end of the music video for ASAP Ant's song "The Way It Go". The single was met with generally positive reviews from music critics. The album was then changed to be titled L.O.R.D..It has been predicted that L.O.R.D. could've resulted in Nast being the next breakout member of the group. Originally, he was being considered for the 2014 XXL freshman class, but was not added. L.O.R.D. was expected for a 2014 release, however, ASAP Mob leader, the late ASAP Yams announced on his Tumblr account that the album was officially scrapped.


== Musical style ==
Complex said that ASAP Nast's style is deeply rooted in 1990's East Coast hip hop, omitting the trap and southern hip hop influence that some other ASAP Mob members have. Vibe called him a brash, rapid-fire rhymer. He has been credited as able to "adapt his flow to match beats of all styles and eras." His verses are usually boastful and full of multi-syllable rhyme schemes.


== Other Ventures ==


=== Collaborations ===
Various brands such as Converse and Reebok have acknowledged his influence and thus granted him the opportunity to design sneakers that merge heritage with his street-style sensibilities. The rapper has released a number of collaborative pairs with Converse as they played with silhouettes from One Stars and Chuck 70s to the Jack Purcell Mid. In Spring of 2021, ASAP Nast formed a relationship with Reebok as they dropped a new Classic Leather Legacy colorway followed by a Zig Kinetica II Edge.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===


=== Mixtapes ===


=== Singles ===


==== As lead artist ====


==== As featured artist ====


=== Guest appearances ===


== References ==


== External links ==
ASAP Nast on TwitterRon Raphael Braunstein (born June 7, 1976), better known by his stage name Necro, is an American rapper from Brooklyn, New York City.He is the owner of Psycho+Logical-Records founded November 1999. He is the younger brother of rapper Ill Bill.


== Early life ==
Necro was born in Brooklyn, New York City, and grew up in the Glenwood Houses, where he lived for eight years from about six years old to age 14, when he moved to Canarsie, Brooklyn. Born into a Jewish family, he is the son of Israeli immigrants, with ancestry from Israel and Romania. Necro's father was a Romanian-born Israeli soldier and his mother an Orthodox baalat teshuva. When he was in high school he was popular among the hip hop fans that went to his school until he got kicked out for fighting in the 10th grade and sold drugs to make money. He constantly read books.He began his musical career at 11, playing in a death metal band named Injustice. He made a transition from heavy metal to hip hop. In 1988, he started rapping after being influenced by his older brother, rapper Ill Bill. Necro derived his stage-name from the Slayer song "Necrophiliac". Before that he called himself "Mad Mooney", which was a character from a Clive Barker book. He made his first demo in about 1990 and won a demo battle contest on the Stretch Armstrong and Bobbito show on WKCR-FM. In about 1993, Necro started rapping full-time and made a demo called "Do The Charles Manson". In 1995, he proceeded to rap on the Wildman Steve and DJ Riz show WBAU 90.3FM.


== Stylistic characteristics ==


=== Lyrical style ===
Necro lists Kool G Rap as one of his biggest influences in terms of multi-syllabic rhyme structure and content, as well as LL Cool J, Big Daddy Kane, KRS-One, Rakim and the Geto Boys. Necro is also influenced by heavy metal/death metal lyrics, as well as gangster/horror movies, musicals and popular culture.


=== Musical style ===
Necro raps in a hip hop sub-genre called horrorcore.He has done rap metal and has combined rap with death metal music.
Necro refers to his music as "death rap" to describe his style of ultraviolent hip hop and to distinguish himself from other genre labels created by the media. His music combines death metal beats with explicit raps about violence, death, the occult, drugs and sex.


=== Production ===
Necro is a self-taught musician and has been playing instruments since the age of ten. He started producing hip hop beats in 1989 by looping up records and bought an Ensoniq EPS in 1991. In the following years he produced beats for artists like Non Phixion, Cage, Krist and Missing Linx, who all released independent singles. The first record he produced that received airplay was "No Tomorrow" by Non Phixion in 1996, put out on Searchlight Music/FatBeats Distribution.The first wave of albums released on Necro's label were produced by Necro himself. This includes the debut solo albums of Non-Phixion members Ill Bill, Sabac Red and Goretex after he already produced 7 songs for Non Phixion's debut album The Future Is Now in 2002 and Non Phixion's "The Green CD' in 2004, and two albums for label member Mr Hyde. In 2009, a beat Necro produced in 1997 was used by Raekwon on his album Only Built 4 Cuban Linx... Pt. II for the song "Gihad", which also featured Ghostface Killah.


=== Death metal influence ===
Since the inception of his rap career Necro has been influenced by the genre of heavy metal, and more specifically death metal, which has altered his path into hip hop. He has been quoted in interviews citing death metal as a key influence for his rhymes, Chuck Schuldiner's Death in particular.Necro has said that he is heavily influenced by the thrash metal albums Kill 'Em All, Reign in Blood, Slowly We Rot, Leprosy, and Master of Puppets, and he has remarked that those albums take him back to "the '80s when shit was pure".Necro rapped over a death metal blast beat on the track "Suffocated to Death by God's Shadow", with the drums being played by Mike Smith from the band Suffocation and has also collaborated with Scott Ian of Anthrax and Dave Ellefson of Megadeth, two members of the "Big 4", on the track "Evil Rules".Necro references heavy metal acts in his rhymes as well. For instance, on "Underground", Necro states he will "penetrate your skull like a riff from Obituary's 'Slowly We Rot'" and quotes Metallica's "Master of Puppets" by saying "Taste me you will see / more is all you need / dedicated to / how I'm killing you". Over the years, Necro has increased his referencing and collaborations with underground metal acts, as evidenced by his 2004 album The Pre-Fix for Death, which features many references and collaborations with heavy metal musicians from Obituary, Hatebreed, Slipknot, and Voivod. In addition, Necro created his own group known as The Circle of Tyrants, named after a song by Celtic Frost. The Circle of Tyrants album also contains collaborations with artists from Testament, Exhumed, and Sepultura as well as song titles named after '80s thrash metal songs such as Slayer's "South of Heaven" and Metallica's "The Four Horsemen".


=== Concepts ===
Necro is known for releasing conceptual songs. His multilayered, wide-ranging concepts explore how he beats and murders people who aren't as tough as him  and the creative ways in which he has sex with women.  Songs have tackled topics like the Manson murders: "Creepy Crawl", "Cockroaches", "Scalpel", "The 12 King Pimp Commandments", "Dead Body Disposal", "The Human Traffic King", "White Slavery", "I Need Drugs", "Food For Thought", "S.T.D.", picking up women ("86 Measures of Game"), cannibalism ("Human Consumption"), suicide ("You Did It"), bondage and sex games ("EdgePlay"), watersports and micturition ("Piss"), life as a pimp ("Out the Pocket"), a revenge tale ("Some Get Back (Revenge)"), and war narratives ("First Blood").Necro is a devoted fan of the 1983 film Scarface. Necro sampled the main character from Scarface, Tony Montana, in "Cockroaches". Necro has also rapped, "I live scarface scenes" in "Gory Days", and rapped Montana's infamous quote, "you fuck with me you fucking with the best", whilst sampling the quote simultaneously in "asBESTos". Necro also took the title from "Push It to the Limit" which appeared in the film's soundtrack and used the title for his own song "Push it to the Limit". Al Pacino's work besides Scarface plays a recurrent theme throughout Necro's work. Necro's new collaboration with Kool G Rap is called The Godfathers as is the movie The Godfather that made a star of Al Pacino. In "asBESTos", Necro raps, "I'm completely rehabilitated, reinvigorated, reassimilated" which is taken directly from an Al Pacino quote in Carlito's Way.


=== Injustice ===
Necros' first band was Injustice formed in 1986, with Braunstein playing guitar. With this band, alongside his brother Bill on bass and vocals, he played live shows with bands such as Napalm Death, Sepultura and Obituary at the Brooklyn club L'Amours. Injustice recorded their first demo called "The Cursed Earth" in 1989 and their second demo called "Inhuman Conditions" at Josh Silver's house in 1990 before splitting up the same year due to not securing a label contract.


== Psycho+Logical-Records ==
Necro founded the independent record label Psycho+Logical-Records in November 1999. In 15 years, Psycho+Logical-Records has released over 40+ albums all available digitally online on over 300+ outlets & physically in stores on CD & vinyl.


== Touring ==
Necro has been performing live since the age of 11. In 2007, Necro played the Download Festival at Donington. Some of the groups he has opened for include Run DMC, Beatnuts, Sepultura, Kool Keith, Insane Clown Posse, Napalm Death & Biohazard. He has headlined for sold-out shows in some of NYC's mid-sized venues such as Brownie's, Wetlands, The Knitting Factory & SOB's.
During the summer of 2009, Necro was a featured artist on the Rock the Bells tour appearing in Toronto, New York, Chicago, Boston, Los Angeles, Washington, D.C., and San Francisco. On January 1, 2017, Necro was invited to participate in the Juggalo March On Washington. He accepted on January 2, 2017.


== Controversy ==


=== Sounds of the Underground ===
In 2007, Necro toured with Sounds of the Underground. On July 25, 2007, he decided to leave the Sounds of the Underground tour. Necro commented, "I decided to leave the tour collectively with my manager and booking agent (both tour organizers) because we felt the tour's demographic was not receiving hip hop well. I was facing hostile, disrespectful crowds and had lots of glass bottles thrown at me. It was making a lot of people in the tour crew nervous and there was concern someone might get hurt (NOT ME). It was also being suggested that maybe I tone down my live show and not antagonize the already antagonistic crowd. I couldn't roll with that as it's not my style. I was holding back enough as it is but there is a line. All the bands on the tour loved us and everyone behind the scenes knew we displayed major heart and never once got fazed by the hostility. We finished every show according to our 25 minute time slot. I will make one thing clear for the haters: we NEVER got booed OFF the stage. Not once. Yes a ton of emo kids booed us at every show, but we had a twenty-five minute set every night and we stayed on stage for every minute of it, and we represented. Every show had at least 200 NECRO fans in the pit tearing it up, and our meet and greets were incredible! It's just a shame these little kids are so closed-minded. The majority of the hate was coming from mop top emo sixteen-year-olds who have no clue who the originators of metal are, and didn't respect my 'rest in peace' chant to metal legends (Dime, Cliff, Chuck, Piggy, Sob). As far as the tour organizers and I are concerned, you are my peoples so it's all love and I'm thankful for the opportunity to prove I can represent in a variety of situations. This actually did a lot for me and is just one move in many my team will make to blow NECRO up".


=== Riot at Vancouver show ===
On Saturday March 21, 2009, Necro had an appearance scheduled at a Vancouver, Canada nightclub (Richards on Richards). When promoters announced that the show was canceled at the last minute, fans became violent and chaos broke out. People began to throw bottles at the venue's DJ (DJ Sage of the Vancouver hip hop radio show Urban Renewal Project).


=== Perth incident ===
On June 5, 2009, Necro was fined A$3,000 after breaking the jaw of a man in Perth, Australia.  He was arrested at his hotel later that day, forcing the cancellation of his show at Perth's Hyde Park Hotel. He pleaded guilty to the crime.


=== Ani Difranco ===
On May 18, 2010, Necro released DIE! On July 17, 2010, Necro revealed (through his website's forum) that he is being sued by Ani Difranco due to sampling her song "Used to You" for the track "The Asshole Anthem". iTunes and Amazon subsequently removed the album from their stores, and Necro re-released the album without this track included.


=== Inspiration in Tori Stafford's murder ===
On March 23, 2012, jurors in the Tori Stafford murder trial in London, Ontario, were presented with a connection between Necro's music and Tori's admitted killer.The court in the trial of Michael Rafferty heard testimony from convicted murderer Terri-Lynne McClintic that she listened to Necro the day she abducted Tori. Rafferty's defense attorney also noted similarities between the song "Garbage Bag" and letters McClintic had written when she was in a youth facility in 2007 and 2008; the letters described the hypothetical torture and murder of a person. At 5:12pm on April 8, 2009, the day of the murder, Terri-Lynne McClintic was positively identified as purchasing garbage bags. 8-year-old Tori Stafford had been found dead in a green garbage bag on July 19, 2009.Necro issued a press statement on March 23, 2012, saying he does not support "anything that brings harm to children" and that he believes he has been unfairly blamed for the actions of some of his fans.


== Discography ==


=== Solo albums ===
2000: I Need Drugs
2001: Gory Days
2004: The Pre-Fix for Death
2005: The Sexorcist
2007: Death Rap
2010: Die
2012: Murder Murder Kill Kill
2018: The Notorious Goriest


=== Production albums ===
1998: Necro: Cockroaches EP
2000: Necro: I Need Drugs
2001: Necro: Gory Days
2003: Necro: Necro Presents: Brutality Pt. 1 (with Ill Bill, Mr Hyde, Goretex)
2004: Sabac Red: Sabacolypse: A Change Gon' Come
2004: Necro: The Pre-Fix for Death
2004: Ill BIll: "What's Wrong with Bill?"
2004: Mr Hyde: "Barn of The Naked Dead"
2004: Goretex: "The Art of Dying"
2005: Necro: The Sexorcist
2005: The Circle of Tyrants (with Ill Bill, Mr Hyde, Goretex)
2007: Necro: Death Rap (Ind 43, Heat 13)
2010: Necro: DIE! (R&B 48, Heat 19)
2012: Necro: Murder Murder Kill Kill EP
2013: "Once Upon A Crime" by The Godfathers (with Kool G Rap)


== Tours ==
London Tour (2007)
Australian/New Zealand Tour (2009)
Happy Daze Tour (2010)
The DIE! Tour (2010)
Terminator Tour (2015)
The F**k Commercial Rap (with Madchild) (2017)


== Festival appearances ==
Gathering of the Juggalos (2007)
Download Festival (2007)
Hove Festival (2009)
Rock the Bells (2009)
Hip Hop Kemp (2010)
Paid Dues (2010)


=== Directing and Necro films ===
Necro went to Brooklyn College for film for two years where he had access to film making equipment. His movie 187 Reasonz Y had an anti-cop theme with a police officer getting shot in the head at the end of the film. The film department was repulsed by Necro's visions and he received no support from them.Necro's film company has already released three direct-to-video features (187 Reasonz Y, The Devil Made Me Do It and the I Need Drugs music video).


=== Acting ===
Necro has been taking classes on acting and honing his skills in the acting department. In May 2009, he premiered in a short video-film titled, Triumph Of The Kill acting the role of a serial killer clown. The short film was premiered on YouTube and MySpace.


=== Music videos ===


==== Solo videos ====
2000: I Need Drugs (from I Need Drugs)
2003: White Slavery feat. Ill Bill (from Brutality Part 1)
2005: The Prefix For Death (from The Prefix For Death)
2007: Mutilate the Beat (from Death Rap)
2008: Who's Ya Daddy? (from The Sexorcist)
2008: I Wanna Fuck (from The Sexorcist)
2009: The Human Traffic King (White Slavery Part 2) (from DIE!)
2011: Creepy Crawl (from Death Rap)
2011: DIE! (from DIE!)
2011: The Kink Panther (from DIE!)
2011: Sorcerer Of Death's Construction (from DIE!)
2011: No Concern (from Murder Murder Kill Kill EP)
2012: Jewish Gangsters (from Murder Murder Kill Kill EP)


==== Non-solo videos ====
2004: Chasing the Dragon – Ill Bill feat. Necro (from What's Wrong With Bill?)
2004: The Crazies – Mr. Hyde feat. Ill Bill, Goretex and Necro (from Barn of the Naked Dead)
2007: Mechanix – Danny Diablo feat. Necro, Prince Metropolitan and Skinhead Rob


=== Other projects ===
1996: 187 Reasonz Y (a short film directed by Necro and starring Chris Stanger)
1998: The Devil Made Me Do It (a short film directed by Necro and starring Gene Milman)
2003: Sexy Sluts: Been There, Done That (a pornographic DVD directed by Necro hosted by Jerry Butler and starring Lanny Barbie, Uncle Howie and others)
2009: Triumph of the Kill (a short film directed by Bryan Andre, starring Necro)
2009: Personal Justice, a new crime re-enactment show airing on Investigation Discovery during the summer of 2009 (late July to early August). Necro will be in three upcoming episodes in three different roles.
2010:  The Super Necro plays a crooked cop towards the end of the film.
2017: Necro plays Caliph in the film Good Time.


== See also ==
Necro production discography
Ill Bill


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website
Necro at Allmusic
Discography of Necro at Discogs
Ron Braunstein at IMDbMarkel Ni'Jee Scott (born August 26, 1996), better known by his stage name Bishop Nehru, is an American rapper and record producer from Nanuet, New York. He also directs and edits music videos.


== Career ==


=== 2009–13: Early career ===
At age 13, Nehru began making jazz tracks and hip hop instrumentals under the name "Kelz Scott" soon being changed to the name Kile Kanvas at age 14. Nehru released his earlier works on the Odd Future forum and other forums like Hypebeast, Lookbook.nu, and many more.In 2012, WorldStarHipHop named Bishop Nehru the Youth Rap Talent of the Week for his 8-bar freestyle over Mos Def's "Mathematics." Nehru was featured on Hot97.com as part of their Who's Next section, which showcases rappers who are "next to blow up." He also had the song make its way to Power 105.1's New NY with Jovonn "The Don" in February 2013, and opened for Wu-Tang Clan on their 20th Anniversary European tour.When he was 16 years old, Bishop Nehru released his debut mixtape, Nehruvia, a 13-song project that included production from DJ Premier, Madlib, MF DOOM and more. He followed that up with strictlyFLOWz which was presented by New York radio host Peter Rosenberg and the UK's DJ Semtex.In August 2013, it was announced that Bishop Nehru and MF DOOM would collaborate on a project set to be released via Lex Records.


=== 2014–present: Mass Appeal Records, NehruvianDOOM ===
On May 22, 2014, it was announced that Bishop Nehru, Boldy James and Fashawn were the first signees to Nas' Mass Appeal Records. On June 5, 2014,  Dizzy Wright and Bishop Nehru released a free collaborative EP titled BrILLiant Youth EP.
NehruvianDOOM was released on October 7, 2014. Nas announced via Twitter that he will be the executive producer on Nehru's forthcoming album, which has yet to be released.In 2015, Nehru's single, "You Stressin", was featured on EA Sports's NBA Live 15.


== Influences ==
Bishop Nehru's influences include Michael Jackson, Nas, 2Pac, MF DOOM, Kanye West and Wu-Tang Clan. Other influences include Herbie Hancock, 50 Cent, Eminem, Pharrell Williams, ASAP Rocky, Tyler, The Creator, Red Hot Chili Peppers, and IncubusNehru chose his stage name from a combination of Tupac's character in the movie Juice, noting that the character of Bishop inspires him "to go out and get mine, you've got to earn respect" and Nehru is taken from the first prime minister of India, Jawaharlal Nehru, who worked closely with Mahatma Gandhi.


== Discography ==


=== Solo ===
J.A.Z.Z. (2011, as Kelz Scott)
Kanvas (2012, as Kile Kanvas)
Nehruvia (2012, rereleased 2013)
Nehruvia: StrictlyFLOWz (2013)
Nehruvia: The Nehruvian EP (2015)
Bishy's Birthday Playlist (2015)
MAGIC: 19 (2016)
Emperor Nehru's New Groove (2017)
Nehruvia: Elevators (Act I & II) (2018)
Nehruvia: A Nehruvian Holidays EP (2018)
Nehruvian Tuesdays, Vol. 1 (2020)
Nehruvia: My Disregarded Thoughts (2020)
Heroin Addiction (2022)
Nehruvian Tuesdays, Vol. 2 (2022)
CHULO (2022)


=== Collaborations ===
Brilliant Youth EP (with Dizzy Wright and 9th Wonder) (2014)
NehruvianDoom (with MF Doom as NehruvianDoom) (2014)
The Real Book, Vol. 1 (with Brady Watt) (2019)


== References ==


== External links ==
Bishop Nehru's biography on MTV.comQuaadir Atkinson, professionally known as Neo da Matrix, is an American hip hop producer from Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. He attended Stone Mountain High School in Stone Mountain, Georgia. He has worked with Swizz Beatz as an in-house producer for Ruff Ryders Entertainment and has produced for the likes of Cassidy.  Neo Da Matrix is currently working on projects for Cassidy, Jadakiss, Swizz Beatz, Young Chris, Eve, Fabolous, Mýa, David Banner, Juelz Santana, Nina Sky, Tru Life, Range and more.


== Production credits ==


=== 2003 ===


==== Bravehearts – Bravehearted ====
"I Will"


=== 2004 ===


==== Drag-On – Hell and Back ====
"Bronx – Skit"
"Tell Your Friends" (featuring Jadakiss)
"Hector The Killer MC – Skit" (featuring Capone)
"Busta – Skit" (featuring Capone)


==== Jadakiss – Kiss of Death ====
"Air It Out"
"Bring U Down"


==== Jin – The Rest Is History ====
"Get Your Handz Off"
"Chinese Beats (Skit)"
"Senorita"
"Cold Outside" (featuring Lyfe Jennings)


=== 2005 ===


==== Cassidy – I'm a Hustla ====
"On The Grind"
"A.M. to P.M."
"6 Minutes" (featuring Lil Wayne and Fabolous)


==== Juelz Santana – What the Game's Been Missing! ====
"Good Times"
"Mic Check"


==== 4RON – The Start Up ====
"Time Wasted"


==== Ruff Ryders – The Redemption, Vol. 1 (Mixtape) ====
"Double R Wit Us" (Pirate)
"Neo's Shit" (Infa-Red)


==== Ruff Ryders – The Redemption, Vol. 4 ====
"If It's Beef..." (Jadakiss, Kartoon, Infa-Red and Flashy)


=== 2006 ===


==== Fabolous – Back Atcha (Mixtape) ====
"Back Atcha" (featuring Swizz Beatz)


==== Young Chris – The Chain Remains: Rebirth Of A Dynasty (Mixtape) ====
"Live"


==== Styles P – Time Is Money ====
"Who Want A Problem" (featuring Swizz Beatz)
"Who Want A Problem (Remix)" (featuring Swizz Beatz, Jadakiss and Sheek Louch)
"Kick It Like That" (featuring Jagged Edge)


=== 2007 ===


==== Tru Life – Tru York (Mixtape) ====
"Freestyle Intro" (Performed by Jay-Z)
"Knives Like" (featuring N.O.R.E.)
"Get That Paper"


==== Rihanna – Good Girl Gone Bad ====
"Say It"


==== Hood Environment – Drag-On Presents: Welcome To Hood Environment 01 (Mixtape) ====
"Hood Environment Anthem"
"I Declare War"
"My Life"


==== Cassidy – 7.7.7. (Mixtape) ====
"I Don't Give A Fuck"


==== Mario – Go! ====
"How Do I Breathe (Remix)" (featuring Fabolous)


==== Cassidy – B.A.R.S. The Barry Adrian Reese Story ====
"Where My Niggaz At"


==== Swizz Beatz – One Man Band Man ====
"The Funeral"


=== 2008 ===


==== Fabolous – There Is No Competition (Mixtape) ====
"Suicide"
"Fuck Wit' Street Fam" (featuring Neo Da Matrix)
"Hustlas Poster Child" (featuring Cassidy)
"Paperman" (featuring Neo Da Matrix)


==== Memphis Bleek – The Process ====
"Hustla" (featuring Neo Da Matrix)


==== Tru Life – Tru Life ====
"I Can't Believe" (featuring Swizz Beatz)


==== R.Jackman – The Struggle For Power ====
"See You" (featuring Cassidy)


==== Maino – Maino Is The Future (Mixtape) ====
"Take You Home"


=== 2009 ===


==== Jadakiss – The Last Kiss (album) ====
"Can't Stop Me"


==== Rakim – The Seventh Seal (Rakim album) ====
"Satisfaction Guaranteed"


=== 2010 ===


==== Drag-On – My Life, My Legacy, My Melody ====
"Money" (featuring Neo Da Matrix)


=== Other ===
"The Warning" Featuring Cashius Green & Pheo


==== Kidd Domination ====
"Aww Man" featuring Cory Gunz, Smoke DZA, Freck Billionaire & Neo Da Matrix


==== Cassidy ====
"You Already Know" featuring Fabolous & Beanie Sigel
"Time"


==== Drag-On ====
"D.W.I." featuring Sheek Louch


==== Jin ====
"Lord Geezus"


==== Ruff Ryders ====
"Do What We Gotta Do (Remix) featuring Infa-Red, Cross & 2Pac
"Money On My Mind" featuring My-My, Drag-On & Flashy


==== Sin ====
"Fly Away" featuring Tony Sunshine
"Shake It Mami"


==== Styles P ====
"Gunz Is Out"


==== Raekwon ====
"Realer" featuring Maino


==== Tuge ====
"Air It Out" featuring Busta Rhymes


==== Range ====
"Go"
"Fool"
"Off The Market"
"Vacancy"
"Flatline"
"Claptomaniac"
"Guess I'm In Luv"
"I Wanna Love You Down"
"Would U Say"
"No One Else"


==== Ya Boy ====
"Do With That Money"
"The Shit"


==== Neo Da Matrix ====
"Cookie Pop"
"Never Ending"


== References ==


== External links ==
Official MySpace
Neo da Matrix at AllMusic
Neo da Matrix discography at Discogs
Neo da Matrix discography at MusicBrainzDerrick Keyes (born September 19, 1969), known professionally as Nine, is an American rapper from The Bronx, New York City. He is also known as 9MM or Nine Double M. Keyes got his break in early 1993 as a featured guest on Funkmaster Flex and the Ghetto Celebs' "Six Million Ways to Die".
Keyes originally recorded under the moniker 9MM (or Nine Double M) before changing his name to simply Nine. He stated, "I didn't want to be just be named after the gun (9mm)." His stage name refers to his date of birth (September 19, 1969), his shoe size, and his lucky number.


== Career ==
Portions of Nine's "Whutcha Want?" were featured in advertisements by US automobile manufacturer Jeep. The ads used the song "Steady Bounce" by KRS-One from his album Strickly For Da Breakdancers & Emceez, which also used a sample from Nine's "Whutcha Want?". According to an interview conducted with HalftimeOnline.net, Jeep never sought permission to use the sample, and Nine pursued legal action.After Nine joined the Snowgoons on their album Goon Bap in 2016, they have been talking about new music and finally decided to move forward on a collaboration album. In February 2018, Nine and Snowgoons announced a new studio album for summer 2018. The first single/visual "The Revenant" from the forthcoming album was released on February 7, 2018. On July 6, 2018, Nine and Snowgoons announced the release date for their album, King, as September 9, 2018. 4 days later, the second single/visual "Pull Up" was released.Nine acted in an episode of the police drama television series New York Undercover (1997).


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===


=== Singles ===


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Billboard chart historyFrank Ross (born December 23, 1977), better known by his stage name Nitty, is an American rapper from The Bronx, New York. He is perhaps best known for his single "Nasty Girl" and his pop rap style of hip hop, which he calls "playboy rap".


== Career ==
His singles include "Nasty Girl" and "Hey Bitty", the former reaching No. 1 in sales in the United States in October 2004, and also debuting at No. 1 in Australia in 2005. The following album, Player's Paradise, was released in 2005.
In an interview with the former Australian music television show So Fresh, Nitty explained that he did not want to jump into rap as a mean, edgy type of rapper that is the current trend, but more of a nice-guy rapper, with lighthearted songs and videos. He calls this style "playboy rap".
Since Player's Paradise, Nitty has gone on to continue his career as a producer. He is currently an independent artist. In the film Sex Drive, his song "Nasty Girl" was on the soundtrack.


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===
It's Not a Game (2004)
Player's Paradise (2005)
Let's Get Nasty (2009)
NiteLife (2012)


=== Singles ===


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Official SoundCloudGene Elliott Thornton Jr. (born August 18, 1973), better known by his stage name No Malice (formerly known as Malicious and later Malice), is an American rapper from Virginia Beach, Virginia. He is best known for being one half of hip hop duo Clipse, alongside his brother and fellow rapper Pusha T. No Malice released his solo debut album Hear Ye Him, in 2013, and his second studio album, Let the Dead Bury the Dead, in 2017.


== Life and career ==


=== 1973–2009: Early life and Clipse ===
No Malice was born Gene Elliott Thornton Jr. on August 18, 1973, in The Bronx borough of New York City. He and his family later moved down south to Virginia Beach. He and his brother, Pusha T, formed the rap group Clipse in 1992, and later were introduced to fellow Virginian Pharrell Williams, one half of the high-profile production team The Neptunes. Impressed with their lyrical talents, Williams formed a working relationship with the duo. He eventually helped them secure a recording contract with Elektra Records, in 1997. Under Elektra, and with The Neptunes handling its production, Clipse recorded their debut album Exclusive Audio Footage. The group's debut single "The Funeral", helped to generate fan interest in the album, but failed to make a significant commercial impact. With "The Funeral" deemed a failure, Exclusive Audio Footage itself was shelved indefinitely. Clipse were subsequently released from their recording contract shortly thereafter.In early 2001, Williams signed the duo to Arista Records, through his recently established Star Trak Entertainment imprint. Clipse released their commercial debut Lord Willin', on August 20, 2002. The album debuted at No. 1 on Billboard's Top R&B/Hip-hop Album chart and No. 4 on the Billboard 200, fueled by the strength of the lead singles "Grindin'" and "When the Last Time", which peaked at No. 30 and No. 19 respectively, on the Billboard Hot 100. The album's third single "Ma, I Don't Love Her" (featuring Faith Evans), was a modest hit, reaching No. 86 on the Hot 100. On October 1, 2002—only a month after its release—Lord Willin' was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA).In late 2003, Clipse began recording material for its second album, Hell Hath No Fury. However, further work on the album ground to a halt in 2004, when Arista Records's urban artists were absorbed into its sister label Jive Records as part of a larger merger between Sony Music Entertainment and BMG. Due to contractual requirements, Clipse was forced to stay on Jive, while Star Trak and the rest of its roster moved to a new home at Interscope Records. While Clipse resumed work on the album, and eventually finished its recording, the duo became increasingly frustrated with Jive, as the label overlooked it in favor of the more pop-oriented acts on its roster, which caused numerous delays in the release of Hell Hath No Fury. As delays continued, the group asked for a formal release from its contract. When Jive refused to grant this request, the duo sued the label.On May 9, 2006, Clipse finally reached an agreement with Jive Records to release the album through its own label, Re-Up Records, along with Jive. Hell Hath No Fury was finally released on November 28, 2006. It spawned two singles: "Mr. Me Too" with Pharrell Williams and "Wamp Wamp (What It Do)" with Slim Thug. While the album received a great deal of critical acclaim, its sales were modest, at 78,000 in the first week. The hip hop magazine XXL gave the album a "XXL" rating, marking it as a five-star album. At the time only five albums had previously received that honor. In a May 19, 2007 interview with Eye Weekly, Clipse revealed that the group had been officially released from its recording contract with Jive. After this, the duo began discussions with several record labels, eventually signing with Columbia Records on October 26, 2007. The follow-up to Hell Hath No Fury, titled Til the Casket Drops, was released on December 8, 2009 via Columbia Records. In a departure from the group's previous works, which only featured production from the Neptunes, the album features production from Sean "Diddy" Combs' production team The Hitmen, and DJ Khalil among others. The album did not fare as well commercially as the group's first two albums, peaking at No. 41 on the Billboard 200 albums chart.


=== 2010–present: Solo career and Hear Ye Him ===
In April 2010, No Malice announced that he and Pusha T would release solo albums later in the year, and that they were no longer signed to Columbia Records. In 2011 No Malice published his book Wretched, Pitiful, Poor, Blind & Naked, a memoir about his life, including fearing contracting AIDS, as well as his conversion to Christianity.On March 6, 2012, he announced that he changed his name from Malice to No Malice via a video posted to Twitter. It depicted No Malice viewing himself in a casket in a funeral parlor and walking away. The video, which was directed by No Malice, opens with multiple quotes from the Bible: first, from Ephesians 4:31, "Let all bitterness and wrath and anger and clamor and slander be put away from you, along with all malice;" then, from 1 Peter 2:1, "Wherefore laying aside all malice, and all guile, and hypocrisies, and envies, and all evil speakings;" and Romans 1:29, "Being filled with all unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness; full of envy, murder, debate, deceit, malignity; whisperers;" and Colossians 3:8, "But now you must put them all away: anger, wrath, malice, slander, and obscene talk from your mouth."In 2012, No Malice collaborated with Lecrae on his mixtape Church Clothes, on the song "Darkest Hour". On June 19, 2012, No Malice released the first single from Hear Ye Him titled "June" featuring Eric David. On July 24, 2012, the second single from Hear Ye Him titled "Unforgettable" was released. On January 15, 2013, the third single from Hear Ye Him titled "Smoke & Mirrors" featuring Ab-Liva was released. On May 21, 2013, it was announced that his debut album Hear Ye Him would be released on July 2, 2013, but the album was later pushed back. On June 4, 2013, the fourth single from Hear Ye Him titled "Bury That" was released.On August 18, 2017, No Malice released his second studio album, Let the Dead Bury the Dead, which contains the track Fake News, where No Malice denounces his earlier work, singing "Take my catalog, I just as soon set a match to it / Money like a side chick, I ain't that attached to it".
On July 6, 2018, his single "Give 'Em Game" was released. A reviewer on Jam The Hype wrote, "No Malice spits timeless bars that listeners will gain wisdom from."He and his brother made a guest appearance as Clipse on the track "Use This Gospel" on Kanye West's 2019 album Jesus Is King.
In 2022, they have collaborated on Japanese DJ Nigo’s album, titled “I Know NIGO!” on a song called “Punch Bowl”. The following month, they collaborated on brother Pusha T’s album, titled “It's Almost Dry”, on a song called “I Pray For You”. He is credited as No Malice on the record, produced by Ye.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===


=== Guest appearances ===


== References ==Rufus Lee Cooper III (born March 21, 1978), also known by his stage name Young Noble, is an American rapper who was part of Tupac Shakur's rap group Outlawz.
Noble joined the Outlawz in early 1996, and was the last member to be added to the group by Tupac himself, before the late rapper's death in September 1996.


== Life and career ==
Noble was born in Rancho Cucamonga, California. He made his debut on Shakur's album The Don Killuminati: The 7 Day Theory on 4 songs "Bomb First (My Second Reply)", "Hail Mary", "Life of an Outlaw", and "Just Like Daddy".
On December 21, 1999, Shakur's album Still I Rise was released, which consisted of material recorded with 2Pac and one solo song. Noble replaced Hussein Fatal's vocals on the songs.
Through the Outlawz and Young Noble's Twitter pages, together they announced the release of two volumes of mixtapes titled Outlaw Rydahz Vol. 1 and Outlaw Nation 'Outlaw Rydaz Volume One' was released in March 2012, and Outlaw Nation in October 2012.
He also said it would feature some of his mentors and Tupac Shakur's old affiliates, including Thug Life which was 2Pac's group before he created The Outlawz, Money B (who was a member of Shakur's old group Digital Underground) and B-Legit who featured on Shakur's 1996 album on Death Row Records,
All Eyez on Me, on the track "Aint Hard 2 Find".


== Discography ==

Studio albumsNoble Justice (2002)
Son of God (2012)
Powerful (2016)
3rd Eye View (2019)


== Filmography ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official WebsiteDuane Stacy Bridgeford, better known by his stage name NOE, is an American hip hop recording artist from Baltimore, Maryland. He is best known for his affiliation with Jim Jones and his involvement in East Coast hip hop group ByrdGang. He was featured on most of the songs for M.O.B.: The Album (2008) and was a prominent writer and featured artist on Jim Jones' Pray IV Reign (2009). His song, “Done Did It,” is licensed to ABC’s number one crime drama Detroit 1-8-7 for the first episode, which was watched by 13 million viewers.


== Biography ==


=== 2005: Early life and career beginnings ===
Bridgeford was born and raised in the inner city of Baltimore, Maryland. NOE's early adult years were engulfed in the violence and dilapidated neighborhoods that continue to blanket Baltimore City. During a phone interview while at a New York recording studio, Bridgeford wasn't very candid about growing up in East Baltimore. He opts not to mention the name of his high school, and sums up his criminal history as "two arrests, one was for drugs, one was for a gun violation, all in all I did about three years." He does mention that he regrets not being closer to his family, and looks at that rift as the reason he decided to express himself through poetry. In 2002 Bridgeford relocated from Baltimore to New York City in search of a record deal.After being rejected by A&R men throughout the business for sounding like Jay-Z, Bridgeford's business partner Nicole "Nicety" Chaplin, who worked with Dipset President Jim Jones while he was still signed to Jay-Z's Roc-A-Fella label, introduced the two. Chaplin also introduced Bridgeford to Conrad Dimanche, senior vice president at Bad Boy Records, who was impressed with his work but not interested in signing a new act: "[Dimanche] just told me to start writing, and it just so happened that Diddy was working on the Danity Kane project," Bridgeford says. "Writing is where the money is at. There's less scrutiny. I don't have to worry about sounding like anybody or whatever." He went on to write Diddy's lyrics for Danity Kane's debut single "Show Stopper". Working with Diddy has also given him a chance to work side by side with Jay-Z. "It was a real professional situation," Bridgeford says. "He was doing the hook on a song that ended up not being on the Danity Kane album, and I had to come through to write the lyrics."


=== 2006-2009: ByrdGang ===
In 2006 Jones launched ByrdGang Records and formed hip hop collective ByrdGang along with Mel Matrix, NOE, Freekey Zeekey and Chink Santana. Jones' first featured Bridgeford on his 2008 mixtape Harlem's American Gangster. Asylum Records began distributing ByrdGang Records in 2008 where the label released their first album under Asylum & ByrdGang titled M.O.B.: The Album. NOE is featured on 13 tracks of the 18 tracks.  
NOE's lyrics and song writing abilities are also displayed on over 90 percent of the Byrdgang Album. The album debuts at # 5 on the Billboard Rap Charts. M.O.B.: The Album earns a rating of XL (equivalent to 4 out of 5 stars) based on the XXL Magazine rating system.
Pray_IV_Reign by Jim Jones', also features NOE. It was released March 24, 2009. The album peaked at #9 on the Billboard 200 chart. On July 8, Jones released a promotional single entitled "The Good Stuff" featuring NOE.2008 featured Bridgeford perform a freestyle on BET's Rap City "Da Basement". VIBE Magazine highlights the song by NOE called "Headlights". NOE is featured in the 11th Anniversary XXL Magazine Issue representing Baltimore, MD in the Show & Prove section. The FADER Magazine music review featured the single "Headlights". NOE is featured in the 11th Anniversary XXL Magazine Issue representing Baltimore, MD in the Show & Prove section.
2008 The Byrdgang/ShadyVille DJ's "NOE MORE ?'S" Mixtape, a full length mixtape featuring NOE, is released. It reportedly rakes in a whopping 40,000 listens in one day according to DatPiff.com within hours of its release.  "NOE MORE ?'s" features songs such as "Every Night" produced by Afro Keys, "Lime Light" produced by Uncle Ruck and "Headlights" produced by Jay Funk.
In 2009 Bridgeford was ultimately a writer and featured guest on Jim Jones' Pray IV Reign. He was also featured on the critically acclaimed Dame Dash and the Black Keys compilation album Blakroc. His composition "Done Did It" featuring Nicole Wray is licensed to number one TV shows such as CSI, and Ellen.


=== 2010-present: NOE Remorse ===
"Done Did It" is licensed to ABC's number one crime drama "Detroit 187" for the first episode. The first episode was seen in over 13 million homes. Switzerland recording artist Sempe, featured NOE in the song and video for his track entitled, “Angels” with Paula Bright on the chorus. NOE releases his first single called "We City Boyz" from the upcoming summer album release entitled NOE Remorse with his marketing campaign called  NOE the Brand via digital release.


== Discography ==


== Filmography ==


== External links ==
Official website
Noe at AllMusic


== References ==Destiny Nicole Frasqueri (born June 14, 1992), known professionally as Princess Nokia, is an American rapper and songwriter. She released her debut studio album, Metallic Butterfly, in 2014, followed by the 2015 mixtape  Honeysuckle. As Princess Nokia, she rose to prominence for her 2017 studio album 1992 Deluxe. She released another mixtape, titled A Girl Cried Red, in 2018, followed by the release of two studio albums, Everything Sucks and Everything Is Beautiful, in 2020.


== Early life ==
Frasqueri identifies as Afro-Indigenous and is of Puerto Rican descent. When Frasqueri was ten, she lost her mother to AIDS. Between the ages of nine and sixteen, she was in foster care, during which her foster mother was physically abusive. After Frasqueri left foster care, she went to live with her grandmother. She subsequently started writing rhymes. Frasqueri lived around East Harlem and the Lower East Side of New York City at the time.


== Career ==


=== 2010–2018: Early career and career beginnings ===
In 2010, Frasqueri recorded and released her first song, titled "Destiny", under the stage name Wavy Spice on her SoundCloud page, and later released the song on her YouTube channel in mid-2012. Subsequently, she released her second song, titled "Bitch I'm Posh". She next released "YAYA", a song that chronicles her Taíno ancestry. She later released the singles "Vicki Gotti" and "Versace Hottie". Following the singles, Frasqueri changed her stage name to Princess Nokia, which she claimed was an alter ego, and introduced the character with the song "Nokia". On May 12, 2014, Frasqueri released her debut studio album, titled Metallic Butterfly, which debuted on Vice and SoundCloud. On September 8, 2017, she released her second studio album, 1992 Deluxe, an expanded version of her 2016 mixtape, 1992. It peaked at number 25 on the US Billboard's Heatseekers Albums chart. NME listed it as the 32nd best album of 2017.Nokia debuted a radio show on Apple's Beats 1 Radio on February 18, 2018. Episodes aired every other Sunday and allowed listeners to get acquainted with the inner workings of Nokia's mind. The show has a total of six episodes labeled "The Voices in My Head with Princess Nokia." In September 2018, she was chosen as one of the six ambassadors by Maison Margiela to promote their new fragrance, Mutiny. In December 2018, Nokia released a "remastered and expanded version" of the album Metallic Butterfly, which includes three new bonus tracks. That same year, she released a mixtape titled A Girl Cried Red. Stefanie Fernández of NPR deemed it an expression of Frasqueri's artistic and emotional versatility and praised how she "transcends them."


=== 2019–present: Everything Sucks and Everything Is Beautiful ===
In 2019, Nokia had her debut performance as an actress in the independent film Angelfish. In September 2019, she released a song titled "Sugar Honey Iced Tea (S.H.I.T.)". It was described as "a bouncy, empowering bop built around dismissive lyrics about Nokia's enemies." In February 2020, Nokia released two albums: Everything Sucks and Everything Is Beautiful. Pitchfork described Everything Sucks as "locust swarm of angst, restless and frantic" and regarded Everything Is Beautiful as "warm and expansive" in comparison to the former. In March 2021, Nokia released a music video for the song, titled "It's Not My Fault". The single was released through Arista Records and marked the first one Nokia released through a major label.In 2022, she voiced LaBrea, LaCienega's cousin in The Proud Family: Louder and Prouder.


== Artistry ==
Nokia's musical style has been described as "experimental" and "eagerly floating between genres such as rap, soul, rock and house." She lists rappers MC Lyte and Queen Latifah, girl group TLC, singer Shakira, as well as nu metal bands Korn and Slipknot as musical influences. Nokia also cites hardcore, punk, and rave cultures as influences for her performances.


== Personal life ==
Frasqueri identifies as bisexual and has stated such in a past interview and has also talked about how growing up near the queer community of New York City was an important part of her life. The early stages of Princess Nokia's musical career began through performing at gay clubs, as she gained popularity among the gay nightlife scene. She also identifies as a gender non-conforming person and uses both they/them and she/her pronouns.Frasqueri is a strong supporter of intersectional feminism, founding the Smart Girl Club with Milah Libin, a podcast where she discusses healthy living and urban feminism. She is a practitioner of Santería, and has shared her own experience with clairvoyance and spirituality that she infuses her music with.In 2017, Frasqueri punched a male concertgoer at the University of Cambridge, who she accused of mouthing "dirty obscenities" at her. She later told the crowd that "that's what you do when a white boy disrespects you". Later that year, a video of a woman throwing hot soup in a man's face who was calling "a group of teenage boys" a racial slur whilst on a subway journey to Brooklyn surfaced. Frasqueri took responsibility for the incident, saying that "everybody on the train backed [her] up".In 2023, Frasqueri's former backup dancer and friend, Tommy Playboy, died after being hit by a train in New York City.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===


=== Extended plays ===


=== Mixtapes ===
Honeysuckle (2015, as Destiny)
1992 (2016)
A Girl Cried Red (2018)


=== Singles ===


==== As lead artist ====


==== As featured artist ====


=== Other certified songs ===


== Awards and nominations ==


== See also ==
LGBT culture in New York City
List of LGBT people from New York City
Nuyorican
Puerto Ricans in New York City


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website
Princess Nokia at AllMusic
Princess Nokia discography at Discogs
Princess Nokia at IMDb
Princess Nokia's channel on YouTubeChristopher George Latore Wallace (May 21, 1972 – March 9, 1997), better known by his stage names the Notorious B.I.G., Biggie Smalls, or simply Biggie, was an American rapper. Rooted in East Coast hip hop and particularly gangsta rap, he is widely considered one of the greatest rappers of all time. Wallace became known for his distinctive laid-back lyrical delivery, offsetting the lyrics' often grim content. 
Born and raised in Brooklyn, New York City, Wallace signed to Sean "Puffy" Combs' label Bad Boy Records as it launched in 1993, and gained exposure through features on several other artists' singles that year. His debut album Ready to Die (1994) was met with widespread critical acclaim, and included his signature songs "Juicy" and "Big Poppa". The album made him the central figure in East Coast hip hop, and restored New York's visibility at a time when the West Coast hip hop scene was dominating hip hop music. Wallace was awarded the 1995 Billboard Music Awards' Rapper of the Year. The following year, he led his protégé group Junior M.A.F.I.A., a team of himself and longtime friends, including Lil' Kim, to chart success.
During 1996, while recording his second album, Wallace became ensnarled in the escalating East Coast–West Coast hip hop feud. Following Tupac Shakur's murder in a drive-by shooting in Las Vegas in September 1996, speculations of involvement in Shakur's murder by criminal elements orbiting the Bad Boy circle circulated as a result of Wallace's public feud with Shakur. On March 9, 1997, six months after Shakur's murder, Wallace was murdered by an unidentified assailant in a drive-by shooting while visiting Los Angeles. Wallace's second album Life After Death, a double album, was released two weeks later. It reached number one on the Billboard 200, spawned two singles that peaked on the Billboard Hot 100: "Hypnotize" and "Mo Money Mo Problems" (featuring Puff Daddy and Mase), and eventually achieved a diamond certification in the United States.With two more posthumous albums released, Wallace has certified sales of over 28 million copies in the United States, including 21 million albums. Rolling Stone has called him the "greatest rapper that ever lived", and Billboard named him the greatest rapper of all time in 2016. The Source magazine named him the greatest rapper of all time in its 150th issue. In 2006, MTV ranked him at No. 3 on their list of The Greatest MCs of All Time, calling him possibly "the most skillful ever on the mic". In 2020, he was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame.


== Life and career ==


=== 1972–1991: Early life ===
Christopher George Latore Wallace was born at St. Mary's Hospital in the New York City borough of Brooklyn on May 21, 1972, the only child of Jamaican immigrant parents. His mother, Voletta Wallace, was a preschool teacher, while his father, Selwyn George Latore, was a welder and politician. His father left the family when Wallace was two years old, and his mother worked two jobs while raising him. Wallace grew up at 226 St. James Place in Brooklyn's Clinton Hill, near the border with Bedford-Stuyvesant. Raised Catholic, Wallace excelled at Queen of All Saints Middle School, winning several awards as an English student. He attended St Peter Claver Church in the borough. He was nicknamed "Big" because he was overweight by the age of 10. During childhood, Wallace struggled with depression, anxiety, and paranoia, such topics would become subject matter discussed in his lyrical content. Wallace claimed to have begun dealing drugs at about age 12. His mother, often at work, first learned of this during his adulthood.He began rapping as a teenager, entertaining people on the streets, and performed with local groups, the Old Gold Brothers as well as the Techniques. His earliest stage name was MC CWest. He also received tutelage in jazz from saxophonist Donald Harrison, who lived nearby. Wallace requested to transfer from Bishop Loughlin Memorial High School in Fort Greene to George Westinghouse Career and Technical Education High School in Downtown Brooklyn, which future rappers Jay-Z and Busta Rhymes were also attending. According to his mother, Wallace was still a good student but developed a "smart-ass" attitude at the new school. At age 17 in 1989, Wallace dropped out of high school and became more involved in crime. That same year in 1989, he was arrested on weapons charges in Brooklyn and sentenced to five years' probation. In 1990, he was arrested on a violation of his probation. A year later, Wallace was arrested in North Carolina for dealing crack cocaine. He spent nine months in jail before making bail.


=== 1991–1994: Early career and first child ===
After release from jail, Wallace made a demo tape, Microphone Murderer, while calling himself Biggie Smalls, alluding both to Calvin Lockhart's character in the 1975 film Let's Do It Again and to his own stature and obesity, 6 feet 3 inches (1.91 m) and 300 to 380 pounds (140 to 170 kg). Although Wallace reportedly lacked real ambition for the tape, local DJ Mister Cee, of Big Daddy Kane and Juice Crew association, discovered and promoted it, thus it was heard by The Source rap magazine's editor in 1992.In March, The Source column "Unsigned Hype", dedicated to airing promising rappers, featured Wallace. He then spun the attention into a recording. Upon hearing the demo tape, Sean "Puffy" Combs, still with the A&R department of Uptown Records, arranged to meet Wallace. Promptly signed to Uptown on July 14, 1992, Wallace appeared on labelmates Heavy D & the Boyz's 1993 song "A Buncha Niggas". Mid-year, or a year after Wallace's signing, Uptown fired Combs, who, a week later, launched Bad Boy Records, instantly Wallace's new label.On August 8, 1993, Jan Jackson, Wallace's long-time girlfriend, gave birth to his first child, T'yanna, although the couple had parted by then. Himself a high-school dropout, Wallace promised his daughter "everything she wanted", reasoning that if only he had that in childhood, he would have graduated at the top of his class. Wallace continued dealing drugs, but Combs discovered this, and obliged him to stop. Later that year, Wallace gained exposure on a remix of Mary J. Blige's single "Real Love". Having found his moniker Biggie Smalls already claimed, he took a new one, holding for good, The Notorious B.I.G.Around this time, Wallace became friends with fellow rapper Tupac Shakur. Lil' Cease recalled the pair as close, often traveling together whenever they were not working. According to him, Wallace was a frequent guest at Shakur's home and they spent time together when Shakur was in California or Washington, D.C. Yukmouth, an Oakland emcee, claimed that Wallace's style was inspired by Shakur.The "Real Love" remix single was followed by another remix of a Mary J. Blige song, "What's the 411?" Wallace's successes continued, if to a lesser extent, on remixes of Neneh Cherry's song "Buddy X" and of reggae artist Super Cat's song "Dolly My Baby", also featuring Combs, all in 1993. In April, Wallace's solo track "Party and Bullshit" was released on the Who's the Man? soundtrack. In July 1994, he appeared alongside LL Cool J and Busta Rhymes on a remix of his own labelmate Craig Mack's "Flava in Ya Ear", the remix reaching No. 9 on the Billboard Hot 100.


=== 1994: Ready to Die and marriage to Faith Evans ===
On August 4, 1994, Wallace married R&B singer Faith Evans, whom he had met eight days prior at a Bad Boy photoshoot. Five days later, Wallace had his first pop chart success as a solo artist with double A-side, "Juicy / Unbelievable", which reached No. 27 as the lead single to his debut album.Ready to Die was released on September 13, 1994. It reached No. 13 on the Billboard 200 chart and was eventually certified four times platinum. The album shifted attention back to East Coast hip hop at a time when West Coast hip hop dominated US charts. It gained strong reviews and has received much praise in retrospect. In addition to "Juicy", the record produced two hit singles: the platinum-selling "Big Poppa", which reached No. 1 on the U.S. rap chart, and "One More Chance", which sold 1.1 million copies in 1995. Busta Rhymes claimed to have seen Wallace giving out free copies of Ready to Die from his home, which Rhymes reasoned as "his way of marketing himself".Wallace also befriended basketball player Shaquille O'Neal. O'Neal said they were introduced during a listening session for "Gimme the Loot"; Wallace mentioned him in the lyrics and thereby attracted O'Neal to his music. O'Neal requested a collaboration with Wallace, which resulted in the song "You Can't Stop the Reign". According to Combs, Wallace would not collaborate with "anybody he didn't really respect" and that Wallace paid O'Neal his respect by "shouting him out". Wallace later met with O'Neal on Sunset Boulevard in 1997. In 2015, Daz Dillinger, a frequent Shakur collaborator, said that he and Wallace were "cool", with Wallace traveling to meet him to smoke cannabis and record two songs.


=== 1995: Collaboration with Michael Jackson, Junior M.A.F.I.A., success and coastal feud ===
Wallace worked with pop singer Michael Jackson on the song "This Time Around", featured on Jackson's 1995 album HIStory: Past, Present and Future, Book I. Lil' Cease later claimed that while Wallace met Jackson, he was forced to stay behind, with Wallace citing that he did not "trust Michael with kids" following the 1993 child sexual abuse allegations against Jackson. Engineer John Van Nest and producer Dallas Austin recalled the sessions differently, saying that Wallace was eager to meet Jackson and nearly burst into tears upon doing so.In the summer, Wallace met Charli Baltimore and they became involved in a romantic relationship. Several months into their relationship, she left him a voicemail of a rap verse that she had written and he began encouraging her to pursue a career in rap music.Wallace was booked to perform in Sacramento. When his group arrived at the venue there weren't many people there, and when they started performing they were getting coins tossed at them. When they left they were held at gunpoint in the venue's parking lot, allegedly set up by E-40's goons, who were angry about an interview Wallace did with a Canadian magazine. When asked to rank a handful of artists on a scale from one to 10, Wallace gave E-40 a zero. One of Wallace's entourage said to get E-40 on the phone, Wallace explained how they had "got him drunk" and had got him "to say anything", E-40 told his men to stand down and safely escorted them to the airport.In August 1995, Wallace's protégé group, Junior M.A.F.I.A. ("Junior Masters At Finding Intelligent Attitudes"), released their debut album Conspiracy. The group consisted of his friends from childhood and included rappers such as Lil' Kim and Lil' Cease, who went on to have solo careers. The record went gold and its singles, "Player's Anthem" and "Get Money", both featuring Wallace, went gold and platinum. Wallace continued to work with R&B artists, collaborating with R&B groups 112 (on "Only You") and Total (on "Can't You See"), with both reaching the top 20 of the Hot 100. By the end of the year, Wallace was the top-selling male solo artist and rapper on the U.S. pop and R&B charts. In July 1995, he appeared on the cover of The Source with the caption "The King of New York Takes Over", a reference to his alias Frank White, based on a character from the 1990 film King of New York. At the Source Awards in August 1995, he was named Best New Artist (Solo), Lyricist of the Year, Live Performer of the Year, and his debut Album of the Year. At the Billboard Awards, he was Rap Artist of the Year.In his year of success, Wallace became involved in a rivalry between the East and West Coast hip hop scenes with Shakur, now his former friend. In an interview with Vibe in April 1995, while serving time in Clinton Correctional Facility, Shakur accused Uptown Records' founder Andre Harrell, Sean Combs, and Wallace of having prior knowledge of a robbery that resulted in him being shot five times and losing thousands of dollars worth of jewelry on the night of November 30, 1994. Though Wallace and his entourage were in the same Manhattan-based recording studio at the time of the shooting, they denied the accusation.Wallace said: "It just happened to be a coincidence that he [Shakur] was in the studio. He just, he couldn't really say who really had something to do with it at the time. So he just kinda' leaned the blame on me." In 2012, a man named Dexter Isaac, serving a life sentence for unrelated crimes, claimed that he attacked Shakur that night and that the robbery was orchestrated by entertainment industry executive and former drug trafficker, Jimmy Henchman.Later that year on October 4, 1995, Shakur signed to Death Row Records and was released from prison a week later. This made Bad Boy Records and Death Row business rivals, and thus intensified the quarrel.


=== 1996: More arrests, accusations regarding Shakur's death, car accident and second child ===
On March 23, 1996, Wallace was arrested outside a Manhattan nightclub for chasing and threatening to kill two fans seeking autographs, smashing the windows of their taxicab with a baseball bat, and punching one of them. He pleaded guilty to second-degree harassment and was sentenced to 100 hours of community service. In mid-1996, he was arrested at his home in Teaneck, New Jersey, for drug and weapons possession charges.During the recording for his second album, Wallace was confronted by Shakur for the first time since "the rumors started" at the Soul Train Awards and a gun was pulled.In June 1996, Shakur released "Hit 'Em Up", a diss track in which he claimed to have had sex with Faith Evans, who was estranged from Wallace at the time, and that Wallace had copied his style and image. Wallace referenced the first claim on Jay-Z's "Brooklyn's Finest", in which he raps: "If Faye have twins, she'd probably have two 'Pacs. Get it? 2Pac's?" However, he did not directly respond to the track, stating in a 1997 radio interview that it was "not [his] style" to respond.On September 7, 1996, Shakur was shot multiple times in a drive-by shooting in Las Vegas and died six days later. Rumors of Wallace's involvement with Shakur's murder spread. In a 2002 Los Angeles Times series titled "Who Killed Tupac Shakur?", based on police reports and multiple sources, Chuck Philips reported that the shooting was carried out by a Compton gang, the Southside Crips, to avenge a beating by Shakur hours earlier, and that Wallace had paid for the gun.
Los Angeles Times editor Mark Duvoisin wrote that "Philips' story has withstood all challenges to its accuracy, ... [and] remains the definitive account of the Shakur slaying." Wallace's family denied the report, producing documents purporting to show that he was in New York and New Jersey at the time. However, The New York Times called the documents inconclusive, stating: The pages purport to be three computer printouts from Daddy's House, indicating that Wallace was in the studio recording a song called Nasty Boy on the night Shakur was shot. They indicate that Wallace wrote half the session, was in and out/sat around and laid down a ref, shorthand for a reference vocal, the equivalent of a first take. But nothing indicates when the documents were created. And Louis Alfred, the recording engineer listed on the sheets, said in an interview that he remembered recording the song with Wallace in a late-night session, not during the day. He could not recall the date of the session but said it was likely not the night Shakur was shot. We would have heard about it, Mr. Alfred said." Evans remembered her husband calling her on the night of Shakur's death and crying from shock. She said: "I think it's fair to say he was probably afraid, given everything that was going on at that time and all the hype that was put on this so-called beef that he didn't really have in his heart against anyone." Wayne Barrow, Wallace's co-manager at the time, said Wallace was recording the track "Nasty Boy" the night Shakur was shot. Shortly after Shakur's death, he met with Snoop Dogg, who claimed that Wallace declared he never hated Shakur.Two days after the death of Shakur, Wallace and Lil' Cease were arrested for smoking marijuana in public and had their car repossessed. The next day, the dealership chose a Chevrolet Lumina rental SUV for them as a substitute, despite Lil' Cease's objections. The vehicle had brake problems but Wallace dismissed them. The car collided with a rail in New Jersey, shattering Wallace's left leg, Lil' Cease's jaw and leaving Charli Baltimore with numerous injuries.Wallace spent months in a hospital following the accident. He was temporarily confined to a wheelchair, forced to use a cane, and had to complete physiotherapy. Despite his hospitalization, he continued to work on the album. The accident was referred to in the lyrics of "Long Kiss Goodnight": "Ya still tickle me, I used to be as strong as Ripple be / Til Lil' Cease crippled me."On October 29, 1996, Evans gave birth to Wallace's son, Christopher "C.J." Wallace Jr. The following month, Junior M.A.F.I.A. member Lil' Kim released her debut album, Hard Core, under Wallace's direction while the two were having a "love affair". Lil' Kim recalled being Wallace's "biggest fan" and "his pride and joy". In a 2012 interview, Lil' Kim said Wallace had prevented her from making a remix of the Jodeci single "Love U 4 Life" by locking her in a room. According to her, Wallace said that she was not "gonna go do no song with them", likely because of the group's affiliation with Tupac and Death Row Records.


=== 1997: Life After Death ===
On January 27, 1997, Wallace was ordered to pay US$41,000 in damages following an incident involving a friend of a concert promoter who claimed Wallace and his entourage beat him following a dispute in May 1995. He faced criminal assault charges for the incident, which remains unresolved, but all robbery charges were dropped. Following the events, Wallace spoke of a desire to focus on his "peace of mind" and his family and friends.In February 1997, Wallace traveled to California to promote his album Life After Death and to record a music video for its lead single, "Hypnotize". That month Wallace was involved in a domestic dispute with girlfriend Charli Baltimore at the Four Seasons hotel, over pictures of Wallace and other girls. Wallace had told Lil' Cease the night prior to take the bag with the photos out of the room, but he had not. Charli Baltimore ended up throwing Wallace's ring and watch from the hotel window. They later found the watch but did not recover the ring.


== Death ==

On March 8, 1997, Wallace attended a Soul Train Awards after-party hosted by Vibe and Qwest Records at the Petersen Automotive Museum. Guests included Evans, Aaliyah and members of the Bloods and Crips gangs. Later that night at 12:30 a.m. PST, after the fire department closed the party early due to overcrowding, Wallace left with his entourage in two GMC Suburbans to return to his hotel. He traveled in the front passenger seat alongside associates Damion "D-Roc" Butler, Lil' Cease, and driver Gregory "G-Money" Young. Combs traveled in the other vehicle with two bodyguards. The two trucks were trailed by a Chevrolet Blazer carrying Bad Boy director of security Paul Offord.By 12:45 a.m., the streets were crowded with people leaving the party. Wallace's SUV stopped at a red light 50 yards (46 m) from the Petersen Automotive Museum, and a black Chevy Impala pulled up alongside it. The Impala's driver, an unidentified African-American man dressed in a blue suit and bow tie, rolled down his window, drew a 9 mm blue-steel pistol, and fired at Wallace's car. Four bullets hit Wallace, and his entourage subsequently rushed him to Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, where doctors performed an emergency thoracotomy, but he was pronounced dead at 1:15 a.m. He was 24 years old. His autopsy, which was released 15 years after his death, showed that only the final shot was fatal; it entered through his right hip and struck his colon, liver, heart, and left lung before stopping in his left shoulder.Wallace's funeral was held at the Frank E. Campbell Funeral Chapel in Manhattan on March 18. There were around 350 mourners at the funeral, including Lil' Cease, Queen Latifah, Mase, Faith Evans, SWV, Jay-Z, Damon Dash, DJ Premier, Charli Baltimore, Da Brat, Flavor Flav, Mary J. Blige, Lil' Kim, Run-D.M.C., DJ Kool Herc, Treach, Busta Rhymes, Salt-N-Pepa, DJ Spinderella, Foxy Brown, and Sister Souljah. David Dinkins and Clive Davis also attended the funeral. After the funeral, his body was cremated and the ashes were given to his family.


== Posthumous releases ==
Sixteen days after his death, Wallace's double-disc second album was released as planned. Originally titled Life After Death...'Til Death Do Us Part and later shortened to Life After Death, the album hit No. 1 on the Billboard 200 charts after making a premature appearance at No. 176 due to street-date violations. The record album featured a much wider range of guests and producers than its predecessor. It gained strong reviews and in 2000 was certified Diamond by the RIAA.
Its lead single, "Hypnotize", was the last music video recording in which Wallace would participate. His biggest chart success was with its follow-up "Mo Money Mo Problems", featuring Sean Combs (under the rap alias "Puff Daddy") and Mase. Both singles reached No. 1 on the Hot 100, making Wallace the first artist to achieve this feat posthumously. The third single, "Sky's the Limit", featuring the band 112, was noted for its use of children in the music video, directed by Spike Jonze, who were used to portray Wallace and his contemporaries, including Combs, Lil' Kim, and Busta Rhymes. Wallace was named Artist of the Year and "Hypnotize" Single of the Year by Spin magazine in December 1997.In mid-1997, Combs released his debut album, No Way Out, which featured Wallace on five songs, notably on the fifth single "Victory". The most prominent single from the record album was "I'll Be Missing You", featuring Combs, Faith Evans and 112, which was dedicated to Wallace's memory. At the 1998 Grammy Awards, Life After Death and its first two singles received nominations in the rap category. The album award was won by Combs's No Way Out and "I'll Be Missing You" won the award in the category of Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group in which "Mo Money Mo Problems" was nominated.In 1996, Wallace started putting together a hip hop supergroup, The Commission, which consisted of himself, Jay-Z, Lil' Cease, Combs, and Charli Baltimore. The Commission was mentioned by Wallace in the lyrics of "What's Beef" on Life After Death and "Victory" from No Way Out, but a Commission album was never completed. A track on Duets: The Final Chapter, "Whatchu Want (The Commission)", featuring Jay-Z, was based on the group.
In December 1999, Bad Boy released Born Again. The album consisted of previously unreleased material mixed with new guest appearances, including many artists Wallace had never collaborated with in his lifetime. It gained some positive reviews, but received criticism for its unlikely pairings; The Source describing it as "compiling some of the most awkward collaborations of his career". Nevertheless, the album sold 2 million copies. Wallace also appeared on Michael Jackson's 2001 album, Invincible.Over the course of time, his vocals were heard on hit songs such as "Foolish" and "Realest Niggas" by Ashanti in 2002, and the song "Runnin' (Dying to Live)" with Shakur the following year. In 2005, Duets: The Final Chapter continued the pattern started on Born Again, which was criticized for the lack of significant vocals by Wallace on some of its songs. Its lead single "Nasty Girl" became Wallace's first UK No. 1 single. Combs and Voletta Wallace have stated the album will be the last release primarily featuring new material.A duet album, The King & I, featuring Evans and Notorious B.I.G., was released on May 19, 2017, which largely contained previously unreleased music.


== Musical style ==


=== Vocals ===

Wallace mostly rapped in a deep tone described by Rolling Stone as a "thick, jaunty grumble", which went even deeper on Life After Death. He was often accompanied on songs with ad libs from Sean "Puffy" Combs. In The Source's "Unsigned Hype" column, his style was described as "cool, nasal, and filtered, to bless his own material". AllMusic described Wallace as having "a talent for piling multiple rhymes on top of one another in quick succession".Time magazine wrote that he rapped with an ability to "make multi-syllabic rhymes sound smooth", while Krims described his rhythmic style as "effusive". Before starting a verse, Wallace sometimes used onomatopoeic vocables to warm up his voice, for example "uhhh" at the beginning of "Hypnotize" and "Big Poppa", and "what" after certain rhymes in songs such as "My Downfall".Lateef of Latyrx notes that Wallace had "intense and complex flows". Fredro Starr of Onyx said that he was "a master of the flow", and Bishop Lamont stated that he mastered "all the hemispheres of the music". Wallace also often used the single-line rhyme scheme to add variety and interest to his flow. Big Daddy Kane suggested that Wallace did not need a large vocabulary to impress listeners, stating that he "just put his words together a slick way and it worked real good for him".Wallace was known to compose lyrics in his head rather than write them down on paper, in a similar way to Jay-Z. He would occasionally vary from his usual style. On "Playa Hater", he sang in a slow falsetto. On "Notorious Thugs", his collaboration with Bone Thugs-n-Harmony, he modified his style to match the rapid rhyme flow of the group.


=== Themes and lyrics ===
Wallace's lyrical topics and themes included mafioso tales ("Niggas Bleed"), his drug-dealing past ("Ten Crack Commandments"), materialistic bragging ("Hypnotize"), humor ("Just Playing (Dreams)"), and romance ("Me & My Bitch"). In 2004, Rolling Stone named him as "one of the few young male songwriters in any pop style writing credible love songs". In the book How to Rap, rapper Guerilla Black described how Wallace was able to both "glorify the upper echelon" and "[make] you feel his struggle".The New York Times journalist Touré wrote in 1994 that Wallace's lyrics "[mixed] autobiographical details about crime and violence with emotional honesty". Marriott of The New York Times wrote in 1997 that Wallace's lyrics were not strictly autobiographical and that he "had a knack for exaggeration that increased sales". Wallace wrote that his debut album was "a big pie, with each slice indicating a different point in [his] life involving bitches and niggaz... from the beginning to the end".Rolling Stone described Ready to Die as a contrast of "bleak" street visions and being "full of high-spirited fun, bringing the pleasure principle back to hip-hop". AllMusic wrote of "a sense of doom" in some of his songs, and the New York Times noted some songs being "laced with paranoia". Wallace described himself as feeling "broke and depressed" when he made his debut. The final song on Wallace's debut album, "Suicidal Thoughts", featured his "character" contemplating suicide and concluded with him doing it.On Life After Death, Wallace's lyrics went "deeper". Krims explained how upbeat, dance-oriented tracks (which featured less heavily on his debut) alternate with "reality rap" songs on the record and suggested that he was "going pimp" through some of the lyrical topics of the former. XXL magazine wrote that Wallace "revamped his image" through the portrayal of himself between the albums, going from "mid-level hustler" on his debut to "drug lord" on his second album.AllMusic wrote that the success of Ready to Die is "mostly due to Wallace's skill as a storyteller". In 1994, Rolling Stone described his ability in this technique as painting "a sonic picture so vibrant that you're transported right to the scene". On Life After Death, he notably demonstrated this skill on the song "I Got a Story to Tell", creating a story as a rap for the first half of the song and then retelling the same story "for his boys" in conversation form.


== Legacy ==

Considered one of the greatest rappers of all time, Wallace was described by AllMusic as "the savior of East Coast hip-hop". The Source magazine named him the greatest rapper of all time in its 150th issue in 2002. In 2003, when XXL magazine asked several hip hop artists to list their five favorite MCs, Wallace appeared on more rappers' lists than anyone else. In 2006, MTV ranked him at No. 3 on their list of The Greatest MCs of All Time, calling him possibly "the most skillful ever on the mic".Editors of About.com ranked him at No. 3 on their list of the Top 50 MCs of Our Time (1987–2007). In 2012, The Source ranked him No. 3 on their list of the Top 50 Lyrical Leaders of all time. Rolling Stone has referred to him as the "greatest rapper that ever lived". In 2015, Billboard named Wallace as the greatest rapper of all time.Wallace's lyrics have been sampled and quoted by a variety of artists, including Jay-Z, 50 Cent, Alicia Keys, Fat Joe, Nelly, Ja Rule, Eminem, Lil Wayne, Game, Clinton Sparks, Michael Jackson, and Usher. At the 2005 MTV Video Music Awards, Combs and Snoop Dogg paid tribute to Wallace by hiring an orchestra to play while the vocals from "Juicy" and "Warning" played on the arena speakers. At the 2005 VH1 Hip Hop Honors, a tribute to Wallace headlined the show.Wallace had begun to promote a clothing line called Brooklyn Mint, which was to produce plus-sized clothing, but it fell dormant after he died. In 2004, his managers Mark Pitts and Wayne Barrow launched the clothing line with help from Jay-Z, selling T-shirts with images of Wallace on them. A portion of the proceeds go to the Christopher Wallace Foundation and to Jay-Z's Shawn Carter Scholarship Foundation. In 2005, Voletta Wallace hired branding and licensing agency Wicked Cow Entertainment to guide the estate's licensing efforts. Wallace-branded products on the market include action figures, blankets, and cell phone content.The Christopher Wallace Memorial Foundation holds an annual black-tie dinner ("B.I.G. Night Out") to raise funds for children's school equipment and to honor Wallace's memory. For this particular event, because it is a children's schools' charity, "B.I.G." is also said to stand for "Books Instead of Guns".There is a large portrait mural of Wallace as Mao Zedong on Fulton Street in Brooklyn a half-mile west from Wallace's old block. A fan petitioned to have the corner of Fulton Street and St. James Place, near Wallace's childhood home renamed in his honor, garnering support from local businesses and attracting more than 560 signatures.A large portrait of Wallace features prominently in the Netflix series Luke Cage, due to the fact that he served as muse for the creation of the Marvel Cinematic Universe's version of Marvel Comics character Cornell "Cottonmouth" Stokes.
In 2018, a movie chronicling LAPD detective Russell Poole's investigation of Wallace's murder was released. City of Lies is based on journalist Randall Sullivan's book "LAbrynith" and explores the corruption and cover-ups within LAPD that surround Wallace's case. Voletta Wallace believed that Poole was honest and wasn't given the chance to do his job. She supported the movie by appearing as herself.In August 2020, Wallace's son, C.J., released a house remix of his father's hit "Big Poppa".A March 2021 Netflix documentary Biggie: I Got a Story to Tell, executive-produced by Voletta Wallace and Combs, focuses on B.I.G.'s life before he rose to fame as "The King of New York", and features "unprecedented access granted by the Wallace estate".


=== Biopic ===
Notorious is a 2009 biographical film about Wallace and his life that stars rapper Jamal Woolard as Wallace. The film was directed by George Tillman Jr. and distributed by Fox Searchlight Pictures. Producers included Sean Combs, Wallace's former managers Wayne Barrow and Mark Pitts, as well as Voletta Wallace. On January 16, 2009, the movie's debut at the Grand 18 theater in Greensboro, North Carolina was postponed after a man was shot in the parking lot before the show. The film received mixed reviews and grossed over $44 million worldwide.In early October 2007, open casting calls for the role of Wallace began. Actors, rappers and unknowns all tried out. Beanie Sigel auditioned for the role, but was not picked. Sean Kingston claimed that he would play the role of Wallace, but producers denied it. Eventually, it was announced that rapper Jamal Woolard was chosen to play Wallace while Wallace's son, Christopher Wallace Jr. was cast to play Wallace as a child.Other cast members include Angela Bassett as Voletta Wallace, Derek Luke as Sean Combs, Antonique Smith as Faith Evans, Naturi Naughton as Lil' Kim, and Anthony Mackie as Tupac Shakur. Bad Boy also released a soundtrack album to the film on January 13, 2009; it contains many of Wallace's hit singles, including "Hypnotize" and "Juicy", as well as rarities.Woolard would reprise his role as Biggie Smalls in the 2017 Tupac Shakur biopic, All Eyez on Me.


== Discography ==

Studio albumsReady to Die (1994)
Life After Death (1997)Collaboration albumConspiracy with Junior M.A.F.I.A. (1995)Posthumous collaboration albumThe King & I with Faith Evans (2017)Posthumous compilation albumsBorn Again (1999)
Duets: The Final Chapter (2005)


== Media ==


=== Filmography ===
The Show (1995) as himself
Rhyme & Reason (1997 documentary) as himself
Biggie & Tupac (2002 documentary) archive footage
Tupac Resurrection (2004 documentary) archive footage
Notorious B.I.G. Bigger Than Life (2007 documentary) archive footage
Notorious (2009) archive footage
All Eyez on Me (2017) archive footage
Quincy (2018 documentary) archive footage
Biggie: The Life of Notorious B.I.G. (2017 documentary) archive footage
Biggie: I Got a Story to Tell (2021 documentary) archive footage
Transformers: Rise of the Beasts (2023) archive footage


=== Television appearances ===
New York Undercover (1995) as himself
Martin (1995) as himself
Who Shot Biggie & Tupac? (2017) archive footage
Unsolved (2018) archive footage


== Awards and nominations ==


== See also ==
List of murdered hip hop musicians


== References ==


== Notes ==


== Further reading ==
Coker, Cheo Hodari (2004). Unbelievable: The Life, Death, and Afterlife of the Notorious B.I.G. New York: Three Rivers Press. ISBN 978-0-609-80835-1.
Tinsley, Justin (2022). It Was All a Dream: Biggie and the World That Made Him. New York: Abrams Books. ISBN 9781419750311. OCLC 1262966009.
Wallace, Voletta; McKenzie, Tremell (2005). Biggie: Voletta Wallace Remembers Her Son, Christopher Wallace, aka Notorious B.I.G. Foreword: Faith Evans. New York: Atria. ISBN 978-0-7434-7020-9.


== External links ==

NotoriousOnline.org Non-profit Biggie Smalls fan site
The Notorious B.I.G. collected news and commentary at The New York Times
The Notorious B.I.G. at IMDb
FBI Records: The Vault – Christopher (Biggie Smalls) Wallace at vault.fbi.govOmar Gerryl Credle (born May 13, 1971), better known by his stage name, O.C., is an American rapper and member of the group D.I.T.C. He has been involved with several underground hip hop groups, namely Crooklyn Dodgers '95, Luv NY, and Perestroika.


== History ==


=== Recording career ===
Credle was born in Brooklyn, May 13, 1971, and raised in the Bushwick section. O.C. cites legends like Kool G. Rap, Rakim, Big Daddy Kane and Slick Rick as his main influences. In 1991, he made his recording debut on Organized Konfusion's "Fudge Pudge". One year later he made an appearance on the remix of MC Serch's "Back to the Grill" (which also features a very young Nas) after meeting Serch on the inaugural Source tour. Following the tour, O.C. signed with Wild Pitch Records in 1994 where Serch was vice president. O.C. also met Lord Finesse and Buckwild on the first Source tour, marking his introduction to the D.I.T.C crew. After the tour he connected with Buckwild and started recording a demo that would become his debut album Word...Life.By 1994, he finished the album Word...Life, which included everything from his demo, along with "Time's Up," the song that would go on to be his most notable single. "Time's up" was initially a record for Pharoahe Monch from Organized Konfusion. Beyond a quick outro from Prince Po, Word...Life does not have any guest appearances. This was not by design, however, as Nas was supposed to be on the album but never showed up to the studio for the recording session.In 1997, O.C. signed to Pay Day Records, where he released his second album Jewelz, featuring collaborations with DJ Premier, Da Beatminerz and Freddie Foxxx. The single "Far From Yours" peaked at #81 on the Billboard Hot 100, making it his highest-charting single to date. 
O.C. is also known for his feature on the Clockers soundtrack as part of the Crooklyn Dodgers, which also featured rappers Chubb Rock and Jeru the Damaja on the now classic DJ Premier produced "Return of the Crooklyn Dodgers". This is however the only time the group has ever collaborated.
Ray's Cafe was released on Red Apples 45, a small label co-founded by A.G. and West. O.C. joined D.I.T.C. for their 2016 release Sessions which was preceded by the lead single "Rock Shyt".


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===


=== Compilations ===
The Underground King

Released: 2006
Label: Next Mill Entertainment/Re-Up Recordings
Singles: -Hidden Gems

Released: April 3, 2007
Certification: None
Label: Next Mill Entertainment
Singles: -In Guud Taste

Released: 2008
Certification: None
Label: Next Mill Entertainment
Singles: -O-Zone Originals

Released: September 21, 2011
Certification: None
Label: No Sleep Recordings
Singles: -Luv NY

Released: July 24, 2012
Label: Ascetic Music
Singles: -


=== Appearances ===
1991: "Fudge Pudge" (from Organized Konfusion: Organized Konfusion)
1992: "Back To The Grill (Remix)" (from MC Serch)
1993: "A Clear Day" (from Dj Clear)
1994: "Let's Organize" (from Organized Konfusion, Q-Tip: Stress: The Extinction Agenda)
1995: "Return of the Crooklyn Dodgers" (from Crooklyn Dodgers: Clockers)
1995: "You Won't Go Far" (from Organized Konfusion: New Jersey Drive, Vol. 2)
1995: "Brainstorm P.S.K" (from Lord Finesse, KRS-One: The Awakening)
1995: "Men V. Many" (from Mic Geronimo, Royal Flush: The Natural)
1995: "Stop The Breaks" (from The Notorious B.I.G., KRS-One, Killa Sin, Raekwon)
1996: "Give Me a Little More Time (Buckwild Remix)" (from Gabrielle)
1996: "What I Represent" (from Buckwild: America Is Dying Slowly)
1996: "Metal Thangz" (from Street Smartz, Pharoahe Monch)
1997: "Love Child" (from Buckwild: Buckwild: Diggin' in the Crates)
1997: "Rollin" (from Saukrates, Masta Ace: The Underground Tapes)
1997: "Your Life" (from Soul in the Hole (soundtrack))
1997: "Droppin' Gramma" (from Main One)
1997: "Crew Love" (from Jay-Z & Tone Hooker)
1997: "Spitgame" (from Da Beatminerz)
1997: "Return to It" (from EZD: A D&D Project In Association With DJ Premier Vol. 1)
1998: "Full Scale" (from Showbiz & A.G.)
1998: "Down 4 Whateva" (from M.O.P: First Family 4 Life)
1998: "Respect Mine" (from Pete Rock: Soul Survivor)
1998: "Action Guaranteed" (from Ras Kass: Lyricist Lounge, Volume One)
1998: "Watch Ya Step" (from Xperado)
1999: "Weed Scented" (from AG, Guru)
1999: "Connection": (from Organized Rhymes Volume 2)
2000: "The Triboro" (from Big L: The Big Picture)
2002: "Beyond" (from DJ JS-1: Ground Original 1)
2003: "Lake Of Fire (Remix)" (from Lordz of Brooklyn: Graffiti Roc)
2004: "Chase Game" (from A.G.)
2007: "Marquee" (from Marco Polo: Port Authority)
2007: "Lake of Fire" (from Lordz of Brooklyn, Lord Finesse, and Everlast)
2008: "Action Guaranteed" (from Ras Kass: Razzy Kazzy)
2009: "Ridiculous" (from DJ JS-1, Pharoahe Monch: Ground Original 2: No Sell Out)
2010: "Trouble Shooters" (from DJ Muggs & Ill Bill: Kill Devil Hills)
2010: "There Will Be Blood" (from Celph Titled and Buckwild: Nineteen Ninety Now)
2010: "Warsaw Outdoors" (from HiFi Banda: 23:55)
2010: "Nostalgic" (from DJ Perro: Praedictus 2 From Filters)
2011: "Life Word" (from DJ JS-1: Ground Original 3: No One Cares)
2012: "Prestige of a King" (from Mello Music Group: Self Sacrifice)
2012: "Don't Worry" (from Showbiz & A.G.)
2012: "Mic Bless'n Gun Press'n Impress'n" (from Bumpy Knuckles)
2013: "Hello Everybody (from Neek The Exotic, Satchel Page, Sadat X)
2013: "Power" (from Ill Bill & Cormega)
2013: "Astonishing" (from Marco Polo, Large Professor, Inspectah Deck: PA2: The Director's Cut)
2013: "Catch Wreck" (from Kid Tsunami)
2014: "B-Boy Stance" (from DJ Force)
2014: "Smash" (from Prince Po, Oh No, Pharoahe Monch)
2014: "Light Years" (from DJ Skizz, Roc Marciano, A.G.)
2014: "Deep Breath" (from DJ Doom & Blacastan)
2014: "On the Bklyn Side" (from Illa Ghee, Steele)
2014: "Turn the Tables" (from DJ JS-1)
2014: "First 2 Rise Pt. 2" (from Vstylez, Royce da 5'9")
2015: "Revolutionary Ride Music" (from DJ EFN, Your Old Droog, Royce Da 5'9", Reks)
2015: "In the Moment" (from Apollo Brown: Grandeur)
2015: "What U Kno" (from In Ya Ear Recordings Presents: In Session Volume 1)
2016: "Don't Touch That Dial (from Apathy, Ras Kass: Handshakes with Snakes)
2016: "Run for Your Life" (from Apathy: Handshakes with Snakes)
2016: "Hakim" (from Vinnie Paz, A.G.: The Cornerstone of the Corner Store).
2016: "Genuine Article "(from TRUTH, From Ashes To Kingdom Come)
2016: "Right What I Write" ft. A.G. (from TRUTH, From Ashes To Kingdom Come)
2019: "Black Sharpie" (from Dirt Platoon: Get Ya Handz Dirty)
2022: "For Everyone" (from Rising Suns: 'Rising Suns')
2022: "All in" (from Ghettosocks, DK, Moka Only: Listen to the Masters)


== References ==Russell Tyrone Jones (November 15, 1968 – November 13, 2004), better known by his stage name Ol' Dirty Bastard (often abbreviated as ODB), was an American rapper. He was one of the founding members of the Wu-Tang Clan, a rap group primarily from Staten Island, New York City, which rose to mainstream prominence with its 1993 debut album Enter the Wu-Tang (36 Chambers).His professional success was hampered by frequent legal troubles, including incarceration. He died on November 13, 2004, of an accidental drug overdose, two days before his 36th birthday.Ol' Dirty Bastard was noted for his "outrageously profane, free-associative rhymes delivered in a distinctive half-rapped, half-sung style". His stage name was derived from the 1980 Chinese martial arts film Ol' Dirty and the Bastard (also called An Old Kung Fu Master, starring Yuen Siu-tien). According to fellow Wu-Tang Clan member Method Man, Ol' Dirty Bastard's name was also a reference to the unique nature of his rapping and, specifically, the fact "there ain't no father to his style."


== Biography ==


=== Early life, formation of the Wu-Tang Clan ===
Russell Tyrone Jones was born on November 15, 1968, in the Fort Greene section of Brooklyn, New York City. He and his cousins Robert Diggs and Gary Grice shared a taste for rap music and martial arts-style movies. Jones, Diggs, and Grice (later known as Ol' Dirty Bastard, RZA, and GZA respectively) formed the group Force of the Imperial Master, which became known as All in Together Now after their successful underground single of the same name. They eventually added six more members to their group, calling it the Wu-Tang Clan. The group released their debut album Enter the Wu-Tang (36 Chambers) in 1993, receiving notable commercial and critical success.


=== Music career ===
Ol' Dirty Bastard's solo career began March 28, 1995, at the age of 26. His first solo album, Return to the 36 Chambers: The Dirty Version, spawned the hit singles "Brooklyn Zoo" and "Shimmy Shimmy Ya", which helped propel the album to platinum status.  The album's sound was noted by several music writers as being as "raw and gritty" as 36 Chambers, with RZA and 4th Disciple producing beats of an even more minimalist and stripped-down style than on the group's debut album. In this same year, Ol' Dirty Bastard collaborated with Mariah Carey for the remix version of her single "Fantasy".
It was around this time that Ol' Dirty Bastard gained notoriety when, as he was being profiled for an MTV biography, he took two of his three children by limousine to a New York State welfare office to cash a $375 welfare check and receive food stamps while his latest album was still in the top 10 of the US charts. The entire incident was filmed by an MTV camera crew and was broadcast nationwide. Although he had recently received a $45,000 cash advance for his first solo album and was earning a cut of the profits from the Wu-Tang Clan's debut album, Ol' Dirty Bastard was still listed as eligible for welfare and food stamps due to the fact that he had not yet filed his taxes for the current year. His caseworker revoked his eligibility after seeing the MTV segment, and the incident was presented by critics of welfare as representative of the allegedly widespread abuse and fraud that led to the significant welfare reforms enacted in 1996.In 1997, Ol' Dirty Bastard appeared on the Wu-Tang Clan's second and most commercially successful work, the double album Wu-Tang Forever. He had fewer appearances on this album than the group's debut, contributing to one solo track ("Dog Shit"), three verses ("Maria", "Reunited", "Heaterz"), one hook ("As High as Wu-Tang Get"), and a spoken introduction/refrain ("Triumph").In February 1998, Ol' Dirty Bastard witnessed a car accident from the window of his Brooklyn recording studio. He and a friend ran to the accident scene and organized about a dozen onlookers, who assisted in lifting the 1996 Ford Mustang—rescuing a 4-year-old girl from the wreckage. She was taken to a hospital with first and second-degree burns. Using a false name, Ol' Dirty Bastard visited the girl in the hospital frequently until he was spotted by members of the media.The evening following the traffic accident, Ol' Dirty Bastard rushed on-stage unexpectedly as Shawn Colvin took the stage to give her acceptance speech for Song of the Year at the 1998 Grammy Awards, and he announced he had recently purchased expensive clothes in anticipation of winning the Grammy Award for Best Rap Album that he lost to Puff Daddy. As Ol' Dirty Bastard took the stage to a round of applause, he asked the audience, "Please calm down, the music and everything. It's nice that I went and bought me an outfit today that costed a lot of money today, you know what I mean? 'Cause I figured that Wu-Tang was gonna win. I don't know how you all see it, but when it comes to the children, Wu-Tang is for the children. We teach the children. You know what I mean? Puffy is good, but Wu-Tang is the best. Okay? I want you all to know that this is ODB, and I love you all. Peace!" The incident was widely covered in the media. The morning after the Grammy Awards, he appeared on The Howard Stern Show, to discuss the incident.In 1999, Ol' Dirty Bastard wrote and recorded his second studio album, Nigga Please, between jail sentences. The album received notable commercial success, although it failed to parallel the critical praise of his debut. This release included the single "Got Your Money", which garnered worldwide chart success. The song was produced by The Neptunes and featured chorus vocals by R&B singer Kelis.
In 1999, Ol' Dirty Bastard was paid $30,000 to appear on Insane Clown Posse's fifth studio album, The Amazing Jeckel Brothers. Completing his track in two days, his recording consisted of his "rambling about bitches". Insane Clown Posse re-recorded the track and re-edited Ol' Dirty Bastard's vocals in order to form four rhymes out of his rambling, titling the song "Bitches".In 2001, with Ol' Dirty Bastard again in jail for crack cocaine possession, his record label Elektra Records made the decision to release a greatest hits album (despite there being only two albums in his back catalog) in order to both end their contract with the artist (see below section), and to profit from the publicity generated by his legal troubles. After the contract with Elektra was terminated, the label D-3 Records released the album The Trials and Tribulations of Russell Jones in 2002, composed of tracks compiled without Ol' Dirty Bastard's input.
In 2003, the day he was released from prison, Ol' Dirty Bastard signed a contract with Roc-A-Fella Records. Living at his mother's home under house arrest and with a court-ordered probation, he used his criminal record to title his VH1 special, Inside Out: Ol' Dirty Bastard on Parole. He also managed to record his third album A Son Unique, which was originally scheduled to be released through Dame Dash Music Group in 2004; as of 2020, however, the album has never been released. In October 2004, one month before his death, his last collaboration was with Jon B. on the track "Everytime" from the album, Stronger Everyday. In 2005, five months after his death, he appeared posthumously on the song "Blah-Blah-Blah" by Brooke Valentine on her debut album, Chain Letter.
On July 17, 2004, Ol' Dirty Bastard had his second to last live performance at the Rock the Bells hip-hop festival in San Bernardino, California, with the rest of the Wu-Tang Clan.
On July 18, 2004, his final live performance was at the Gathering of the Juggalos in Garrettsville, Ohio.
In August 2017 in an interview on Hot 97, Wu-Tang Clan member RZA confirmed that the new Wu-Tang album, The Saga Continues, will contain unreleased vocals by Ol' Dirty Bastard.To celebrate Ol' Dirty Bastard's birthday, "Intoxicated" from the unreleased album A Son Unique was released as a single on November 15, 2018.


== Legal issues ==
In 1993, Ol' Dirty Bastard was convicted of second-degree assault for an attempted robbery and in 1994, he was shot in the abdomen following an argument with another rapper.  In 1997, he was arrested for failure to pay child support for three of his children. In 1998, he pleaded guilty to attempted assault on his wife and was the victim of a home invasion robbery at his girlfriend's house. He was shot in the back and arm but the wounds were superficial.In July 1998, only days after being shot in a push-in robbery at his girlfriend's house in Brooklyn, he was arrested for shoplifting a pair of $50 shoes from a Sneaker Stadium store in Virginia Beach, Virginia, although he was carrying close to $500 in cash at the time. He was issued bench warrants by the Virginia Beach Sheriff's Department to stand trial after he failed to appear in court numerous times. He was arrested for criminal threatening after a series of confrontations in Los Angeles a few weeks later, and was then re-arrested for similar charges not long after that.  During a traffic stop, the details of which remain clouded in multiple versions of events, he was arrested for attempted murder and criminal weapon possession. The case was later dismissed.On January 14, 1999, shortly before the killing of Amadou Diallo, two officers from the Street Crimes Unit fired eight shots at Ol' Dirty Bastard and accused him of firing at them after they stopped his car in Bedford-Stuyvesant. Ol' Dirty Bastard was cleared by a grand jury and insisted that the officers had been scared by his cellular phone. No weapons or shell casings (besides those of the officers) were found in the vehicle or near the scene.In February 1999, he was arrested for driving without a license and for being a convicted felon wearing a bulletproof vest. At the time, it was illegal for felons to own body armor. Back in New York weeks later, he was arrested for drug possession of crack cocaine and for traffic offenses. With multiple cases in the past and present, he was arrested with marijuana and 20 vials of crack.In October 2000, he escaped from his court-mandated drug treatment facility and spent one month as a fugitive. During his time on the run, he met with RZA and spent some time in their recording studio. He then appeared onstage at the Hammerstein Ballroom in New York drinking from a bottle at the record release party for The W, the third Wu-Tang Clan album. In late November 2000, while still a fugitive, he was arrested outside a South Philadelphia McDonald's (at 29th and Gray's Ferry Ave.), after he drew a crowd while signing autographs. He spent several days in a Philadelphia jail and was later extradited to New York City. A Manhattan court sentenced him to two to four years incarceration. He was released on parole on May 1, 2003.In 2012, his FBI file was released to the public after a Freedom of Information Act request. It contains details of numerous crimes, such as alleged connections to three murders, a shootout with the New York City Police Department, and a Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act investigation against the Wu-Tang Clan.


== Death ==
Leading up to his death, Ol' Dirty Bastard's legal troubles and eccentric behavior made him "something of a folk hero", according to The New Yorker writer Michael Agger. Music writer Steve Huey wrote: "it was difficult for observers to tell whether Ol' Dirty Bastard's wildly erratic behavior was the result of serious drug problems or genuine mental instability." According to The Atlantic contributing editor and music biographer James Parker, Ol' Dirty Bastard had been diagnosed with bipolar disorder around 2003.Ol' Dirty Bastard collapsed at approximately 4:35 p.m. (EST) on November 13, 2004 (two days before his 36th birthday), at RZA's recording studio (36 Chambers Records LLC on West 34th Street in New York City); he was pronounced dead at the scene. His funeral was held at Brooklyn's Christian Cultural Center and drew a crowd of thousands.
The official cause of death was a drug overdose; an autopsy found a lethal mixture of cocaine and the prescription opioid tramadol. The overdose was ruled accidental and witnesses say Ol' Dirty Bastard complained of chest pain on the day he died.
Mourning the decline of Jones' mental and physical health, RZA wrote in his 2009 book The Tao of Wu:Trust me, the man who became ODB, Ason Unique, my cousin, he was a scientist and a minor prophet... People may not know this from the outrageous character he played, but ODB was a visionary. But he decayed, he lost that vision... From the time they put him in jail to all the drugs he was doing to all the stress he went through with his family, it took away his ability to see. And this night, he sat there and looked me in the eye and said, "RZA, I don't understand." ... Now, I know that right there, right when he said that—we lost him. Eight hours later, ODB was gone.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===
Return to the 36 Chambers: The Dirty Version (1995)
Nigga Please (1999)
A Son Unique (2005)


== Awards and nominations ==
Grammy Awards


== References ==


== External links ==

Wu-Tang Clan at Curlie
Ol' Dirty Bastard at IMDb
Ol' Dirty Bastard discography at Discogs
Ol' Dirty Bastard Tells Why He Stormed Grammy Stage
The Economist – Obituary in brief Ol' Dirty Bastard
FBI Records: The Vault – Russell Tyrone Jones at vault.fbi.govShaquille Rashaun O'Neal ( shə-KEEL; born March 6, 1972), known commonly as Shaq ( SHAK), is an American former professional basketball player who is a sports analyst on the television program Inside the NBA. He is a 7-foot-1-inch (2.16 m) and 325-pound (147 kg) center who played for six teams over his 19-year career in the National Basketball Association (NBA) and is a four-time NBA champion. O'Neal is regarded as one of the greatest basketball players and centers of all time.After playing college basketball for the LSU Tigers, O'Neal was drafted by the Orlando Magic with the first overall pick in the 1992 NBA draft. He quickly became one of the best centers in the league, winning Rookie of the Year in 1992–93 and leading his team to the 1995 NBA Finals. After four years with the Magic, O'Neal signed as a free agent with the Los Angeles Lakers. They won three consecutive championships in 2000, 2001, and 2002. Amid a feud between O'Neal and his teammate Kobe Bryant, O'Neal was traded to the Miami Heat in 2004, and his fourth NBA championship followed in 2006. Midway through the 2007–2008 season he was traded to the Phoenix Suns. After a season-and-a-half with the Suns, O'Neal was traded to the Cleveland Cavaliers in the 2009–10 season. O'Neal played for the Boston Celtics in the 2010–11 season before retiring.O'Neal's individual accolades include the 1999–2000 Most Valuable Player (MVP) Award; the 1992–93 NBA Rookie of the Year award; 15 All-Star Game selections, three All-Star Game MVP awards; three Finals MVP awards; two scoring titles; 14 All-NBA team selections, and three NBA All-Defensive Team selections. He is one of only three players to win NBA MVP, All-Star Game MVP and Finals MVP awards in the same year (2000); the other players are Willis Reed in 1970 and Michael Jordan in 1996 and 1998. He ranks 8th all-time in points scored, 6th in field goals, 15th in rebounds, and 8th in blocks. O'Neal was honored as one of the league's greatest players of all-time by being named to the NBA 50th Anniversary Team in 1996. Due to his ability to dunk the basketball and score from close range, O'Neal also ranks third all-time in field goal percentage (58.2%) and led the league in field goal percentage ten times. O'Neal was elected into the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame in 2016. He was elected to the FIBA Hall of Fame in 2017. In October 2021, O'Neal was again honored as one of the league's greatest players of all-time by being named to the NBA 75th Anniversary Team.In addition to his basketball career, O'Neal has released four rap albums, with his first, Shaq Diesel, going platinum. O'Neal is also an electronic music producer, and touring DJ, known as DIESEL. He has appeared in numerous films and has starred in his own reality shows, Shaq's Big Challenge and Shaq Vs. He hosts The Big Podcast with Shaq. He was a minority owner of the Sacramento Kings from 2013 to 2022 and is the general manager of Kings Guard Gaming of the NBA 2K League.


== Early life ==
O'Neal was born on March 6, 1972, in Newark, New Jersey, to Lucille O'Neal and Joe Toney, who played high school basketball (he was an All-State guard) and was offered a basketball scholarship to play at Seton Hall. Toney struggled with drug addiction and was imprisoned for drug possession when O'Neal was an infant. Upon his release, he did not resume a place in O'Neal's life and instead agreed to relinquish his parental rights to O'Neal's Jamaican stepfather, Phillip Arthur Harrison, a career Army sergeant. O'Neal remained estranged from his biological father for decades; O'Neal had not spoken with Toney or expressed an interest in establishing a relationship. On his 1994 rap album, Shaq Fu: The Return, O'Neal voiced his feelings of disdain for Toney in the song "Biological Didn't Bother", dismissing him with the line "Phil is my father." However, O'Neal's feelings toward Toney mellowed in the years following Harrison's death in 2013, and the two met for the first time in March 2016, with O'Neal telling him, "I don't hate you. I had a good life. I had Phil."O'Neal came from a tall family. His father and mother were 6 ft 1 in (1.85 m) and 6 ft 2 in (1.88 m) tall, respectively, and by age 13, O'Neal was already 6 ft 6 in (1.98 m) tall. He credited the Boys & Girls Clubs of America in Newark with giving him a safe place to play and keeping him off the streets. "It gave me something to do," he said. "I'd just go there to shoot. I didn't even play on a team." Because of his stepfather's career in the military, the family left Newark, moving to military bases in Germany and Texas.After returning from Germany, O'Neal's family settled in San Antonio, Texas. By age 16, O'Neal had grown to 6 ft 10 in (2.08 m), and he began playing basketball at Robert G. Cole High School. He led his team to a 68–1 record over two years and helped the team win the state championship during his senior year. His 791 rebounds during the 1989 season remains a state record for a player in any classification. O'Neal's tendency to make hook shots earned comparisons to Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, inspiring him to wear the same jersey number as Abdul-Jabbar, No. 33. However, his high school team did not have a 33 jersey, so O'Neal chose to wear No. 32 before college.


== College career ==
After graduating from high school, O'Neal studied business at Louisiana State University (LSU). He had first met Tigers coach Dale Brown years earlier in Europe when O'Neal's stepfather was stationed on a U.S. Army base at Wildflecken, West Germany. While playing for Brown at LSU, O'Neal was a two-time All-American, two-time SEC Player of the Year, and received the Adolph Rupp Trophy as NCAA men's basketball player of the year in 1991; he was also named college player of the year by AP and UPI. O'Neal left LSU early to pursue his NBA career, but continued his education even after becoming a professional player. He was later inducted into the LSU Hall of Fame. A 900-pound (410 kg) bronze statue of O'Neal is located in front of the LSU Basketball Practice Facility.


== Professional career ==


=== Orlando Magic (1992–1996) ===


==== Rookie of the Year (1992–1993) ====
The Orlando Magic drafted O'Neal with the 1st overall pick in the 1992 NBA draft. In the summer before moving to Orlando, he spent time in Los Angeles under the tutelage of Hall of Famer Magic Johnson. O'Neal wore number 32 because Terry Catledge refused to relinquish the 33 jersey. O'Neal was named the Player of the Week in his first week in the NBA, the first player to do so. During his rookie season, O'Neal averaged 23.4 points on 56.2% shooting, 13.9 rebounds, and 3.5 blocks per game for the season. He was named the 1993 NBA Rookie of the Year and was the first rookie to be voted an All-Star starter since Michael Jordan in 1985. The Magic finished 41–41, winning 20 more games than the previous season, but missed the playoffs by virtue of a tie-breaker with the Indiana Pacers. On more than one occasion during the year, Sports Illustrated writer Jack McCallum overheard O'Neal saying, "We've got to get [head coach] Matty [Guokas] out of here and bring in [assistant] Brian [Hill]."


==== First playoff appearance (1993–1994) ====
In 1993–1994, O'Neal's second season, Hill was the coach and Guokas was reassigned to the front office. O'Neal improved his scoring average to 29.4 points (second in the league to David Robinson) while leading the NBA in field goal percentage at 60%. On November 20, 1993, against the New Jersey Nets, O'Neal registered the first triple-double of his career, recording 24 points to go along with career highs of 28 rebounds and 15 blocks. He was voted into the All-Star game and also made the All-NBA 3rd Team. Teamed with newly drafted Anfernee "Penny" Hardaway, the Magic finished with a record of 50–32 and made the playoffs for the first time in franchise history. In his first playoff series, O'Neal averaged 20.7 points and 13.3 rebounds as the Pacers swept the Magic.


==== First scoring title and NBA Finals (1994–1996) ====
In O'Neal's third season, 1994–95, he led the NBA in scoring with a 29.3 point average, while finishing second in MVP voting to David Robinson and entering his third straight All-Star Game along with Hardaway. They formed one of the league's top duos and helped Orlando to a 57–25 record and the Atlantic Division crown. The Magic won their first-ever playoff series against the Boston Celtics in the 1995 NBA Playoffs. They then defeated the Chicago Bulls in the conference semifinals. After beating Reggie Miller's Indiana Pacers, the Magic reached the NBA Finals, facing the defending NBA champion Houston Rockets. O'Neal played well in his first Finals appearance, averaging 28 points on 59.5% shooting, 12.5 rebounds, and 6.3 assists. Despite this, the Rockets, led by future Hall-of-Famers Hakeem Olajuwon and Clyde Drexler, swept the series in four games.O'Neal was injured for a great deal of the 1995–96 season, missing 28 games. He averaged 26.6 points and 11 rebounds per game, made the All-NBA 3rd Team, and played in his 4th All-Star Game. Despite O'Neal's injuries, the Magic finished with a regular season record of 60–22, second in the Eastern conference to the Chicago Bulls, who finished with an NBA record 72 wins. Orlando easily defeated the Detroit Pistons and the Atlanta Hawks in the first two rounds of the 1996 NBA Playoffs; however, they were no match for Jordan's Bulls, who swept them in the Eastern Conference Finals.


=== Los Angeles Lakers (1996–2004) ===


==== O'Neal–Bryant tandem buildup (1996–1999) ====
O'Neal became a free agent after the 1995–96 NBA season. In the summer of 1996, O'Neal was named to the United States Olympic basketball team, and was later part of the gold medal-winning team at the 1996 Olympics in Atlanta. While the Olympic basketball team was training in Orlando, the Orlando Sentinel published a poll that asked whether the Magic should fire Hill if that were one of O'Neal's conditions for returning. 82% answered "no". O'Neal had a power struggle while playing under Hill. He said the team "just didn't respect [Hill]". Another question in the poll asked whether O'Neal was worth $115 million, in reference to the amount of the Magic's offer; 91.3% of the response said it was not. O'Neal's Olympic teammates teased him over the poll. He was also upset that the Orlando media implied O'Neal was not a good role model for having a child with his longtime girlfriend with no immediate plans to marry. O'Neal compared his lack of privacy in Orlando to "feeling like a big fish in a dried-up pond". He also learned that Hardaway considered himself the leader of the Magic and did not want O'Neal making more money than him.On the team's first full day at the Olympics in Atlanta, the media announced that O'Neal would join the Los Angeles Lakers on a seven-year, $121 million contract. O'Neal insisted he did not choose Los Angeles for the money; discussing the signing he referred to a couple of his product endorsements, saying: "I'm tired of hearing about money, money, money, money, money. I just want to play the game, drink Pepsi, wear Reebok." The Lakers won 56 games during the 1996–97 season. O'Neal averaged 26.2 points and 12.5 rebounds in his first season with Los Angeles; however, he again missed over 30 games due to injury. The Lakers made the playoffs, but were eliminated in the second round by the Utah Jazz in five games. In his first playoff game for the Lakers, O'Neal scored 46 points against the Portland Trail Blazers, the most for the Lakers in a playoff game since Jerry West had 53 in 1969. On December 17, 1996, O'Neal shoved Dennis Rodman of the Chicago Bulls; Rodman's teammates Scottie Pippen and Michael Jordan restrained Rodman and prevented further conflict. The Los Angeles Daily News reported that O'Neal was willing to be suspended for fighting Rodman, and O'Neal said: "It's one thing to talk tough and one thing to be tough."The following season, O'Neal averaged 28.3 points and 11.4 rebounds. He led the league with a 58.4 field goal percentage, the first of five consecutive seasons in which he did so. The Lakers finished the season 61–21, first in the Pacific Division, and were the second seed in the western conference during the 1998 NBA Playoffs. After defeating the Portland Trail Blazers and Seattle SuperSonics in the first two rounds, the Lakers again fell to the Jazz, this time in a 4–0 sweep.With the tandem of O'Neal and teenage superstar Kobe Bryant, expectations for the Lakers increased; however, personnel changes were a source of instability during the 1998–99 season. Long-time Laker point guard Nick Van Exel was traded to the Denver Nuggets; his former backcourt partner Eddie Jones was packaged with back-up center Elden Campbell for Glen Rice to satisfy a demand by O'Neal for a shooter. Coach Del Harris was fired, and former Lakers forward Kurt Rambis finished the season as head coach. The Lakers finished with a 31–19 record during the lockout-shortened season. Although they made the playoffs, they were swept by the San Antonio Spurs, led by Tim Duncan and David Robinson in the second round of the Western Conference playoffs. The Spurs would go on to win their first NBA title in 1999.


==== MVP and championship seasons (1999–2002) ====
In 1999, prior to the 1999–2000 season, the Lakers hired Phil Jackson as head coach, and the team's fortunes soon changed. Jackson immediately challenged O'Neal, telling him "the [NBA's] MVP trophy should be named after him when he retired."In the November 10, 1999, game against the Houston Rockets, O'Neal and Charles Barkley were ejected. After O'Neal blocked a layup by Barkley, O'Neal shoved Barkley, who then threw the ball at O'Neal. On March 6, 2000, O'Neal's 28th birthday, he scored a career-high 61 points to go along with 23 rebounds and 3 assists in a 123–103 win over the LA Clippers. O'Neal's 61-point game is the most recent game in NBA history that a player scored 60 or more points without hitting a 3-pointer.O'Neal was also voted the 1999–2000 regular season Most Valuable Player, one vote short of becoming the first unanimous MVP in NBA history. Fred Hickman, then of CNN, instead chose Allen Iverson, then of the Philadelphia 76ers who would go on to win MVP the next season. O'Neal also won the scoring title while finishing second in rebounds and third in blocked shots. Jackson's influence resulted in a newfound commitment by O'Neal to defense, resulting in his first All-Defensive Team selection (second-team) in 2000.In the 2001 NBA Finals against the 76ers, O'Neal fouled out in Game 3 backing over Dikembe Mutombo, the 2000–2001 Defensive Player of the Year. "I didn't think the best defensive player in the game would be flopping like that. It's a shame that the referees buy into that", O'Neal said. "I wish he'd stand up and play me like a man instead of flopping and crying every time I back him down.A month before the 2001–02 season's training camp, O'Neal had corrective surgery for a claw toe deformity in the smallest toe of his left foot. He opted against a more involved surgery to return quicker. He was ready for the start of the 2001–02 regular season, but the toe frequently bothered him.In January 2002, he was involved in a spectacular on-court brawl in a game against the Chicago Bulls. He punched center Brad Miller after an intentional foul to prevent a basket, resulting in a melee with Miller, forward Charles Oakley, and several other players. O'Neal was suspended for three games without pay and fined $15,000. For the season, O'Neal averaged 27.2 points and 10.7 rebounds, excellent statistics but below his career average; he was less of a defensive force during the season.Matched up against the Sacramento Kings in the 2002 Western Conference finals, O'Neal said, "There is only one way to beat us. It starts with c and ends with t." O'Neal meant "cheat" in reference to the alleged flopping of Kings' center Vlade Divac. O'Neal referred to Divac as "she", and said he would never exaggerate contact to draw a foul. "I'm a guy with no talent who has gotten this way with hard work." 
After the 2001–2002 season, O'Neal told friends that he did not want another season of limping and being in virtually constant pain from his big right toe. His trademark mobility and explosion had been often absent. The corrective options ranged from reconstructive surgery on the toe to rehabilitation exercises with more shoe inserts and anti-inflammation medication. O'Neal was already wary of the long-term damage his frequent consumption of these medications might have. He did not want to rush a decision with his career potentially at risk.Using Jackson's triangle offense, O'Neal and Bryant enjoyed tremendous success, leading the Lakers to three consecutive titles (2000, 2001, and 2002). O'Neal was named MVP of the NBA Finals all three times and had the highest scoring average for a center in NBA Finals history.


==== Toe surgery to departure (2002–2004) ====
O'Neal missed the first 12 games of the 2002–03 season recovering from toe surgery. He was sidelined with hallux rigidus, a degenerative arthritis in his toe. He waited the whole summer until just before training camp for the surgery and explained, "I got hurt on company time, so I'll heal on company time." O'Neal debated whether to have a more invasive surgery that would have kept him out an additional three months, but he opted against the more involved procedure. The Lakers started the season with a record of 11–19. At the end of the season, the Lakers had fallen to the fifth seed and failed to reach the Finals in 2003.
For the 2003–04 season, the team made a concerted off-season effort to improve its roster. They sought the free-agent services of two aging stars—forward Karl Malone and guard Gary Payton—but due to salary cap restrictions, could not offer either player nearly as much money as he could have made with some other teams. O'Neal assisted in the recruitment efforts and personally persuaded both men to join the squad, each forgoing larger salaries in favor of a chance to win an NBA championship. At the beginning of the 2003–04 season, O'Neal wanted a contract extension with a pay raise on his remaining three years for $30 million. The Lakers had hoped O'Neal would take less money due to his age, physical conditioning, and games missed due to injuries. During a preseason game, O'Neal had yelled at Lakers owner Jerry Buss, "Pay me." There had been increasing tension between O'Neal and Bryant. The feud climaxed during training camp prior to the 2003–2004 season when Bryant, in an interview with ESPN journalist Jim Gray, criticized O'Neal for being out of shape, a poor leader, and putting his salary demands over the best interest of the team.The Lakers made the playoffs in 2004 and lost to the Detroit Pistons in the 2004 NBA Finals. Lakers assistant coach Tex Winter said, "Shaq defeated himself against Detroit. He played way too passively. He had one big game ... He's always interested in being a scorer, but he hasn't had nearly enough concentration on defense and rebounding". After the series, O'Neal was angered by comments made by Lakers general manager Mitch Kupchak regarding O'Neal's future with the club, as well as by the departure of Lakers coach Phil Jackson at the request of Buss. O'Neal made comments indicating that he felt the team's decisions were centered on a desire to appease Bryant to the exclusion of all other concerns, and O'Neal promptly demanded a trade. Kupchak wanted the Dallas Mavericks' Dirk Nowitzki in return but Mavericks owner Mark Cuban refused to let his 7-footer go. However, Miami showed interest, and eventually the two clubs agreed on a trade. Winter said, "[O'Neal] left because he couldn't get what he wanted—a huge pay raise. There was no way ownership could give him what he wanted. Shaq's demands held the franchise hostage, and the way he went about it didn't please the owner too much."


=== Miami Heat (2004–2008) ===


==== MVP runner-up (2004–2005) ====
On July 14, 2004, O'Neal was traded to the Miami Heat for Caron Butler, Lamar Odom, Brian Grant, and a future first-round draft choice (the Lakers used the draft choice to select Jordan Farmar in the 2006 draft). O'Neal reverted from (his Lakers jersey) number 34 to number 32, which he had worn while playing for the Magic. Upon signing with the Heat, O'Neal promised the fans that he would bring a championship to Miami. He claimed one of the main reasons for wanting to be traded to Miami was because of their up-and-coming star Dwyane Wade, to whom he gave the nickname "Flash". With O'Neal on board, the new-look Heat surpassed expectations, claiming the best record in the Eastern Conference in 2004–05 with 59 wins. He played in 73 games, his most since 2001 season, averaged 22.9 points a game along with 10.4 rebounds and 2.3 blocks. O'Neal made his 12th consecutive All-Star Team, made the All-NBA 1st Team, and won the Eastern Conference Player of the Month award for his performance in March. O'Neal also narrowly lost the 2004–05 MVP Award to Phoenix Suns guard Steve Nash in one of the closest votes in NBA history.Despite being hobbled by a deep thigh bruise, O'Neal led the Heat to the Eastern Conference Finals and a Game 7 against the defending champion Detroit Pistons, losing by a narrow margin. Afterwards, O'Neal and others criticized Heat head coach Stan Van Gundy for not calling enough plays for O'Neal. 
In August 2005, O'Neal signed a 5-year-extension with the Heat for $100 million. Supporters applauded O'Neal's willingness to take what amounted to a pay cut and the Heat's decision to secure O'Neal's services for the long term. They contended that O'Neal was worth more than $20 million per year, particularly given that lesser players earned almost the same amount.


==== Fourth championship (2005–2006) ====
In the second game of the 2005–06 season, O'Neal injured his right ankle and subsequently missed the following 18 games. Upon O'Neal's return, Van Gundy resigned, citing family reasons, and Pat Riley assumed head coach responsibilities. O'Neal later referred to Van Gundy as a "frontrunner" and a "master of panic." Many critics stated that Heat coach Riley correctly managed O'Neal during the rest of the season, limiting his minutes to a career low. Riley felt doing so would allow O'Neal to be healthier and fresher come playoff time. Although O'Neal averaged career lows (or near-lows) in points, rebounds, and blocks, he said in an interview "Stats don't matter. I care about winning, not stats. If I score 0 points and we win I'm happy. If I score 50, 60 points, break the records, and we lose, I'm pissed off. 'Cause I knew I did something wrong. I'll have a hell of a season if I win the championship and average 20 points a game." During the 2005–06 season, the Heat recorded only a .500 record without O'Neal in the line-up.
On April 11, 2006, O'Neal recorded his second career triple-double against the Toronto Raptors with 15 points, 11 rebounds and a career-high 10 assists. O'Neal finished the 2005–06 season as the league leader in field goal percentage.In the 2006 NBA Playoffs, the Heat first faced the younger Chicago Bulls, and O'Neal delivered a dominating 27 point, 16 rebound and 5 blocks performance in game 1 followed by a 22-point effort in game 2 to help Miami take a 2–0 lead in the series. Chicago would respond with two dominating performances at home to tie the series, but Miami would respond right back with a victory at home in game 5. Miami returned to Chicago and closed out the series in the 6th game, highlighted by another dominating performance by O'Neal who finished with 30 points and 20 rebounds. Miami advanced to face New Jersey, who won a surprising game 1 victory before the Heat won four straight to assure a rematch with Detroit. The Pistons had no answer for Wade throughout the series, while O'Neal delivered 21 points and 12 rebounds in game 3 followed by 27 points and 12 boards in game 4 to help Miami take a 3–1 series lead. The Pistons would win game 5 in Detroit, and Wade would once again get injured, but the Heat 
held on to win game 6 with O'Neal scoring 28 points with 16 rebounds and 5 blocks to help Miami reach their first-ever NBA Finals.In the Finals, the Heat were underdogs against the Dallas Mavericks led by Dirk Nowitzki, and the Mavericks won the first two games at home in dominating fashion. The Heat led by Wade and a balanced effort by O'Neal, Antoine Walker and Jason Williams would go on to win all three of the next games at home, before closing out the series in Dallas to deliver the first NBA title for the franchise and O'Neal's fourth title. With Wade carrying the offensive load, O'Neal did not need to have a dominating series, and finished with an average of 13.7 points and 10.2 rebounds for the series.


==== Surgery and Wade's injury (2006–2007) ====
In the 2006–07 season, O'Neal missed 35 games after an injury to his left knee in November required surgery. After one of those missed games, a Christmas Day match-up against the Lakers, he ripped Jackson, who O'Neal had once called a second father, referring to his former coach as "Benedict Arnold". Jackson had previously said, "The only person I've ever [coached] that hasn't been a worker... is probably Shaq." The Heat struggled during O'Neal's absence, but with his return won seven of their next eight games. Bad luck still haunted the squad, however, as Wade dislocated his left shoulder, leaving O'Neal as the focus of the team. Critics doubted that O'Neal, now in his mid-30s, could carry the team into the playoffs. The Heat went on a winning streak that kept them in the race for a playoff spot, which they finally secured against the Cleveland Cavaliers on April 5.In a rematch of the year before, the Heat faced the Bulls in the first round of the 2006–07 NBA playoffs. The Heat struggled against the Bulls and although O'Neal put up reasonable numbers, he was not able to dominate the series. The Bulls swept the Heat, the first time in 50 years a defending NBA champion was swept in the opening round. It was the first time in 13 years that O'Neal did not advance into the second round. In the 2006–07 season O'Neal reached 25,000 career points, becoming the 14th player in NBA history to accomplish that milestone. However, it was the first season in O'Neal's career that his scoring average dropped below 20 points per game.


==== Career lows and disagreements (2007–2008) ====
O'Neal experienced a rough start for the 2007–08 season, averaging career lows in points, rebounds, and blocks. His role in the offense diminished, as he attempted only 10 field goals per game, versus his career average of 17. In addition, O'Neal was plagued by fouls, and during one stretch fouled out of five consecutive games. O'Neal's streak of 14 straight All-Star appearances ended that season. O'Neal again missed games due to injuries, and the Heat had a 15–game losing streak. According to O'Neal, Riley thought he was faking the injury. During a practice in February 2008, O'Neal got into an altercation with Riley over the coach ordering a tardy Jason Williams to leave practice. The two argued face-to-face, with O'Neal poking Riley in the chest and Riley slapping his finger away. Riley soon after decided to trade O'Neal. O'Neal said his relationship with Wade was not "all that good" by the time he left Miami, but he did not express disappointment at Wade for failing to stand up for him.O'Neal played 33 games for the Miami Heat in the 2007–08 season prior to being traded to the Phoenix Suns. O'Neal started all 33 games and averaged 14.2 points per game. Following the trade to Phoenix, O'Neal averaged 12.9 points while starting all 28 games with the Suns.


=== Phoenix Suns (2008–2009) ===
The Phoenix Suns acquired O'Neal in February 2008 from the league-worst Miami Heat, who had a record at the time of the trade of 9–37, in exchange for Shawn Marion and Marcus Banks. O'Neal made his Suns debut on February 20, 2008, against his former Lakers team, scoring 15 points and grabbing 9 rebounds in the process. The Lakers won, 130–124. O'Neal was upbeat in a post-game press conference, stating: "I will take the blame for this loss because I wasn't in tune with the guys [...] But give me four or five days to really get in tune and I'll get it."In 28 regular season games, O'Neal averaged 12.9 points and 10.6 rebounds, good enough to make the playoffs. One of the reasons for the trade was to limit Tim Duncan in the event of a postseason matchup between the Suns and the San Antonio Spurs, especially after the Suns' six-game elimination by the Spurs in the 2007 NBA Playoffs. O'Neal and the Phoenix Suns did face the Spurs in the first round of the playoffs, but they were once again eliminated, in five games. O'Neal averaged 15.2 points, 9.2 rebounds and 1.0 assists per game.O'Neal preferred his new situation with the Suns over the Heat. "I love playing for this coach and I love playing with these guys", O'Neal said. "We have professionals who know what to do. No one is asking me to play with [his former Heat teammates] Chris Quinn or Ricky Davis. I'm actually on a team again." Riley felt O'Neal was wrong for maligning his former teammates. O'Neal responded with an expletive toward Riley, whom he often referred to as the "great Pat Riley" while playing for the Heat. O'Neal credited the Suns training staff with prolonging his career. They connected his arthritic toe, which would not bend, to the alteration of his jump that consequently was straining his leg. The trainers had him concentrate on building his core strength, flexibility, and balance.The 2008–09 season improved for O'Neal, who averaged 18 points, 9 rebounds, and 1.6 blocks through the first half (41 games) of the season, leading the Suns to a 23–18 record and 2nd place in their division. He returned to the All-Star Game in 2009 and emerged as co-MVP along with ex-teammate Kobe Bryant.

On February 27, 2009, O'Neal scored 45 points and grabbed 11 rebounds, his 49th career 40-point game, beating the Toronto Raptors 133–113.
In a matchup against Orlando on March 3, 2009, O'Neal was outscored by Magic center Dwight Howard, 21–19. "I'm really too old to be trying to outscore 18-year-olds", O'Neal said, referring to the then 23-year-old Howard. "It's not really my role anymore." O'Neal was double-teamed most of the night. "I like to play people one-on-one. My whole career I had to play people one-on-one. Never once had to double or ask for a double. But it's cool", said O'Neal. During the game, O'Neal flopped against Howard. Magic coach Stan Van Gundy, who had coached O'Neal with the Heat, was "very disappointed cause [O'Neal] knows what it's like. Let's stand up and play like men, and I think our guy did that tonight." O'Neal responded, "Flopping is playing like that your whole career. I was trying to take the charge, trying to get a call. It probably was a flop, but flopping is the wrong use of words. Flopping would describe his coaching." Mark Madsen, a Lakers teammate of O'Neal's for three years, found it amusing since "everyone in the league tries to flop on Shaq and Shaq never flops back." In a 2006 interview in TIME, O'Neal said if he were NBA commissioner, he would "Make a guy have to beat a guy—not flop and get calls and be nice to the referees and kiss ass."On March 6, O'Neal talked about the upcoming game against the Rockets and Yao Ming. "It's not going to be man-on-man, so don't even try that," says O'Neal with an incredulous laugh. "They're going to double and triple me like everybody else ... I rarely get to play [Yao] one-on-one ... But when I play him (on defense), it's just going to be me down there. So don't try to make it a Yao versus Shaq thing, when it's Shaq versus four other guys."The 2009 NBA Playoffs was also the first time since O'Neal's rookie season in 1992–93 that he did not participate in the playoffs. He was named as a member of the All-NBA Third Team. The Suns notified O'Neal he might be traded to cut costs.


=== Cleveland Cavaliers (2009–2010) ===
On June 25, 2009, O'Neal was traded to the Cleveland Cavaliers for Sasha Pavlovic, Ben Wallace, $500,000, and a 2010 second-round draft pick. Upon arriving in Cleveland, O'Neal said, "My motto is very simple: Win a Ring for the King", referring to LeBron James. James was the leader of the team, and O'Neal deferred to him. On February 25, 2010, O'Neal suffered a severe right thumb injury while attempting to go up for a shot against Glen Davis of the Boston Celtics. He had surgery on the thumb on March 1 and returned to play in time for the first round of the playoffs. After defeating the Chicago Bulls in the first round, the Cavaliers went on to lose to the Boston Celtics in the second round. In September 2016, O'Neal said: "When I was in Cleveland, we were in first place. Big Baby [Glen Davis] breaks my hand and I had to sit out five weeks late in the year. I come back finally in the first round of the playoffs, and we lost to Boston in the second round. I was upset. I know for a fact if I was healthy, we would have gotten it done that year and won a ring." O'Neal averaged career lows in almost every major statistical category during the 2009–10 season, taking on a much less significant role than in previous years.


=== Boston Celtics (2010–2011) ===
Upon hearing Bryant comment that he had more rings than O'Neal, Wyc Grousbeck, principal owner of the Celtics, saw an opportunity to acquire O'Neal. Celtics coach Doc Rivers agreed to the signing on the condition that O'Neal would not receive preferential treatment, nor could he cause any locker room problems like in Los Angeles or Miami. On August 4, 2010, the Celtics announced that they had signed O'Neal. The contract was for two years at the veteran minimum salary for a total contract value of $2.8 million. O'Neal wanted the larger mid-level exception contract, but the Celtics chose instead to give it to Jermaine O'Neal. The Atlanta Hawks and the Dallas Mavericks also expressed interest but had stalled on O'Neal's salary demands. He was introduced by the Celtics on August 10, 2010, and chose the number 36.O'Neal said he did not "compete with little guys who run around dominating the ball, throwing up 30 shots a night—like D–Wade, Kobe." O'Neal added that he was only competing against Duncan: "If Tim Duncan gets five rings, then that gives some writer the chance to say 'Duncan is the best,' and I can't have that." Publicly, he insisted he did not care whether he started or substituted for the Celtics, but expected to be part of the second unit. Privately, he wanted to start, but kept it to himself. O'Neal missed games throughout the season due to an assortment of ailments to his right leg including knee, calf, hip, and Achilles injuries. The Celtics traded away center Kendrick Perkins in February partially due to the expectation that O'Neal would return to fill Perkins' role. The Celtics were 33–10 in games Perkins had missed during the year due to injury, and they were 19–3 in games that O'Neal played over 20 minutes. After requesting a cortisone shot, O'Neal returned April 3 after missing 27 games due to his Achilles; he played only five minutes due to a strained right calf. It was the last regular season game he would play that year. O'Neal missed the first round of the 2011 playoffs. He insisted on more cortisone shots and returned in the second round, but he was limited to 12 minutes in two games as the Heat eliminated the Celtics from the playoffs.On June 1, 2011, O'Neal announced his retirement via social media. On a short video on Twitter, O'Neal tweeted, "We did it. Nineteen years, baby. I want to thank you very much. That's why I'm telling you first. I'm about to retire. Love you. Talk to you soon." On June 3, 2011, O'Neal held a press conference at his home in Orlando to officially announce his retirement.


== National team career ==
While in college, O'Neal was considered for the Dream Team to fill the college spot, but it eventually went to future teammate Christian Laettner. His national team career began in the 1994 FIBA World Championship in which he was named MVP of the Tournament. While he led the Dream Team II to the gold medal with an 8–0 record, O'Neal averaged 18 points and 8.5 rebounds and recorded two double-doubles. In four games, he scored more than 20 points. Before 2010, he was the last active American player to have a gold from the FIBA World Cup.
He was one of two players (the other being Reggie Miller) from the 1994 roster to be also named to the Dream Team III. Due to more star-power, he rotated with Hakeem Olajuwon and David Robinson and started 3 games. He averaged 9.3 points and 5.3 rebounds with 8 total blocks. Again, a perfect 8–0 record landed him another gold medal at the 1996 Olympics in Atlanta. O'Neal was upset that coach Lenny Wilkens played Robinson more minutes in the final game; Wilkens previously explained to O'Neal that it would probably be Robinson's last Olympics.After his 1996 experience, he declined to play in international competition. He was angered by being overlooked for the 1999 FIBA AmeriCup squad, saying it was a "lack of respect". He forwent an opportunity to participate in the 2000 Olympics, explaining that two gold medals were enough. O'Neal also chose not to play in the 2002 FIBA World Championship. He rejected an offer to play in the 2004 Olympics, and although he was initially interested in being named for 2006–2008 US preliminary roster, he eventually declined the invitation.


== Player profile ==
O'Neal established himself as an overpowering low post presence, putting up career averages of 23.7 points on .582 field goal accuracy, 10.9 rebounds and 2.3 blocks per game.
At 7 ft 1 in (2.16 m), 330 lb (150 kg) and U.S. shoe size 23, he became famous for his physical stature. His physical frame gave him a power advantage over most opponents. On two occasions during his first season in the NBA, his powerful dunks broke the steel backboard supports, prompting the league to increase the brace strength and stability of the backboards for the following 1993–94 season.O'Neal's "drop step", (called the "Black Tornado" by O'Neal) in which he posted up a defender, turned around and, using his elbows for leverage, powered past him for a very high-percentage slam dunk, proved an effective offensive weapon. In addition, O'Neal frequently used a right-handed jump hook shot to score near the basket. The ability to dunk contributed to his career field goal accuracy of .582, second only to Artis Gilmore as the highest field goal percentage of all time. He led the NBA in field goal percentage 10 times, breaking Wilt Chamberlain's record of nine.Opposing teams often used up many fouls on O'Neal, reducing the playing time of their own big men. O'Neal's imposing physical presence inside the paint caused dramatic changes in many teams' offensive and defensive strategies.O'Neal's primary weakness was his free throw shooting, with a career average of 52.7%. He once missed all 11 of his free throw attempts in a game against the Seattle SuperSonics on December 8, 2000, a record. O'Neal believes his free throw woes were a mental issue, as he often shot 80 percent in practice. In hope of exploiting O'Neal's poor foul shooting, opponents often committed intentional fouls against him, a tactic known as "Hack-a-Shaq". O'Neal was the third-ranked player all-time in free throws taken, having attempted 11,252 free-throws in 1,207 games up to and including the 2010–11 season. On December 25, 2008, O'Neal missed his 5,000th free throw, becoming the second player in NBA history to do so, along with Chamberlain.O'Neal only made one three-point shot during his entire career. He made the shot during the 1995–96 NBA season with the Orlando Magic. His career three-point-shot record is 1 for 22 (a 4.5% career percentage).
O'Neal was a capable defender, named three times to the All-NBA Second Defensive Team. His presence intimidated opposing players shooting near the basket, and he averaged 2.3 blocked shots per game over the course of his career.Phil Jackson believed O'Neal underachieved in his career, saying he "could and should have been the MVP player for 10 consecutive seasons." In 2022, to commemorate the NBA's 75th Anniversary The Athletic ranked their top 75 players of all time, and named O'Neal as the 8th greatest player in NBA history.The Lakers retired his No. 34 jersey on April 2, 2013. On February 26, 2016, the Miami Heat announced that it would retire O'Neal's No. 32 jersey during the 2016–17 season, making O'Neal one of just 32 athletes in American professional sports history to have their jersey retired by multiple teams. The Heat eventually retired his jersey on December 22, 2016, during halftime of a game against his former team, the Los Angeles Lakers.


== Off the court ==


=== Media personality ===
O'Neal called himself "The Big Aristotle" and "Hobo Master" for his composure and insights during interviews. Journalists and others gave O'Neal several nicknames, including "Shaq", "The Diesel", "Shaq Fu", "The Big Daddy", "Superman", "The Big Agave", "The Big Cactus", "The Big Shaqtus", "The Big Galactus", "Wilt Chamberneezy", "The Big Baryshnikov", "The Real Deal", "The Big Shamrock", "The Big Leprechaun", "Shaqovic", and "The Big Conductor". Although he was a favorite interviewee of the press, O'Neal was sensitive and often went weeks without speaking. When he did not want to speak with the press, he employed an interview technique whereby, sitting in front of his cubicle, he would murmur in his low-pitched voice.During the 2000 Screen Actors Guild strike, O'Neal performed in a commercial for Disney. O'Neal was fined by the union for crossing the picket line.O'Neal's humorous and sometimes incendiary comments fueled the Los Angeles Lakers' long-standing rivalry with the Sacramento Kings; O'Neal frequently referred to the Sacramento team as the "Queens". During the 2002 victory parade, O'Neal declared that Sacramento would never be the capital of California, after the Lakers beat the Kings in a tough seven-game series en route to its third championship with O'Neal.
He also received media flak for mocking Chinese people when interviewed about newcomer center Yao Ming. O'Neal told a reporter, "you tell Yao Ming, ching chong yang, wah, ah so." O'Neal later said it was locker room humor and he meant no offense. Yao believed that O'Neal was joking, but he said many Asians wouldn't see the humor. Yao joked, "Chinese is hard to learn. I had trouble with it when I was little." O'Neal later expressed regret for the way he treated Yao early in his career.During the 2005 NBA playoffs, O'Neal compared his poor play to Erick Dampier, a Dallas Mavericks center who had failed to score a single point in one of their recent games. The quip inspired countless citations and references by announcers during those playoffs, though Dampier himself offered little response to the insult. The two would meet in the 2006 NBA Finals.O'Neal was very vocal with the media, often making jabs at former Laker teammate Kobe Bryant. In the summer of 2005, when asked about Bryant, he responded, "I'm sorry, who?" and continued to pretend that he did not know who Bryant was until well into the 2005–06 season.O'Neal also appeared on television on Saturday Night Live (he was initially picked to host the second episode of season 24 in 1998, but had to back down due to scheduling conflicts, being replaced by Kelsey Grammer; however, he did appear in two sketches during the episode) and in 2007 hosted Shaq's Big Challenge, a reality show on ABC in which he challenged Florida kids to lose weight and stay in shape.
When the Lakers faced the Heat on January 16, 2006, O'Neal and Bryant made headlines by engaging in handshakes and hugs before the game, an event that was believed to signify the end of the so-called "Bryant–O'Neal feud" that had festered since O'Neal left Los Angeles. O'Neal was quoted as saying that he accepted the advice of NBA legend Bill Russell to make peace with Bryant. On June 22, 2008, O'Neal freestyled a diss rap about Bryant in a New York club. While rapping, O'Neal blamed Bryant for his divorce from his wife Shaunie and claims to have received a vasectomy, as part of a rhyme. He also taunted Bryant for not being able to win a championship without him. O'Neal led the audience to mockingly chant several times "Kobe, tell me how my ass tastes". O'Neal justified his act by saying "I was freestyling. That's all. It was all done in fun. Nothing serious whatsoever. That is what MCs do. They freestyle when called upon. I'm totally cool with Kobe. No issue at all." Although even other exponents of hip hop, such as Snoop Dogg, Nas and Cory Gunz, agreed with O'Neal, Maricopa County, Arizona Sheriff Joe Arpaio expressed his intention to relieve O'Neal of his Maricopa County sheriff posse badge, due to "use of a racially derogatory word and other foul language". The racial quote from his song was "it's like a white boy trying to be more nigga than me."


=== Music career ===
Beginning in 1993, O'Neal began to compose rap music. He released five studio albums and 1 compilation album. Although his rapping abilities were criticized at the outset, one critic credited him with "progressing as a rapper in small steps, not leaps and bounds". His 1993 debut album, Shaq Diesel, received platinum certification from the RIAA.
O'Neal was featured alongside Michael Jackson as a guest rapper on "2 Bad", a song from Jackson's 1995 album HIStory. He contributed three tracks, including the song "We Genie", to the Kazaam soundtrack. O'Neal was also featured in Aaron Carter's 2001 hit single "That's How I Beat Shaq". Shaq also appears in the music video for the release.Shaquille O'Neal conducted the Boston Pops Orchestra at the Boston Symphony Hall on December 20, 2010.
O'Neal also started DJing in the 1980s at LSU.


==== As DJ Diesel ====
Currently, O'Neal produces electronic dance music and tours the world under the stage name DJ Diesel.In July 2017, O'Neal released a diss track aimed at LaVar Ball, the father of NBA point guard Lonzo Ball. The three-minute song was released in response to Ball claiming him and his younger son LaMelo, would beat O'Neal and his son Shareef in a game of basketball.
On October 23, 2021, O'Neal performed his first ever set as DJ Diesel on the bassPOD stage at the 2021 Electric Daisy Carnival in Las Vegas, Nevada.On June 7, 2023, O'Neal released his first single as DJ Diesel from his debut album Gorilla Warfare, titled "Bang Your Head" in collaboration with Hairitage. The album was released on August 18.


=== Education ===
O'Neal left LSU for the NBA after three years. However, he promised his mother he would eventually return to his studies and complete his bachelor's degree. He fulfilled that promise in 2000, earning his B.A. degree in general studies from LSU, with a minor in political science. Coach Phil Jackson let O'Neal miss a home game so he could attend graduation. At the ceremony, he told the crowd "now I can go and get a real job".
Subsequently, O'Neal earned an online MBA degree through the University of Phoenix in 2005. In reference to his completion of his MBA degree, he stated: "It's just something to have on my resume for when I go back into reality. Someday I might have to put down a basketball and have a regular 9-to-5 like everybody else."Toward the end of his playing career, he began work on an educational doctorate at Barry University. His doctoral capstone topic was "The Duality of Humor and Aggression in Leadership Styles". O'Neal received his Ed.D. degree in Human Resource Development from Barry in 2012. O'Neal told a reporter for ABC News that he plans to further his education by attending law school.In 2009, O'Neal attended the Sportscaster U. training camp at S. I. Newhouse School of Public Communications at Syracuse University, saying "You have to know what you're doing... I needed to learn the secrets".O'Neal has also studied directing and cinematography with the New York Film Academy's Filmmaking Conservatory.


=== Law enforcement ===
O'Neal maintained a high level of interest in the workings of police departments and became personally involved in law enforcement. O'Neal went through the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Reserve Academy and became a reserve officer with the Los Angeles Port Police. 
On March 2, 2005, O'Neal was given an honorary U.S. Deputy Marshal title and named the spokesman for the Safe Surfin' Foundation; he served an honorary role on the task force of the same name, which tracks down sexual predators who target children on the Internet.Upon his trade to Miami, O'Neal began training to become a Miami Beach reserve officer. On December 8, 2005, he was sworn in, but elected for a private ceremony to avoid distracting attention from the other officers. He assumed a $1-per-year salary in this capacity. Shortly thereafter, in Miami, O'Neal witnessed a hate crime (assaulting a man while calling out homophobic slurs) and called Miami-Dade police, describing the suspect and helping police, over his cell phone, track the offender. O'Neal's actions resulted in the arrest of two suspects on charges of aggravated battery, assault, and a hate crime.In September 2006, O'Neal took part in a raid on a home in rural Bedford County, Virginia. O'Neal had been made an "honorary deputy" by the local sheriff's department. O'Neal was not qualified as a SWAT officer.In June 2008, the Bedford County, Virginia, and Maricopa County, Arizona, sheriff departments revoked O'Neal's special deputyship after a video surfaced of him rapping about Kobe Bryant and using racial slurs.On January 20, 2015, O'Neal was sworn in as a reserve officer for Doral, Florida's police force. In December 2016, O'Neal was sworn in as a sheriff's deputy in Jonesboro, Georgia, as part of Clayton County, Georgia Sheriff's Department. O'Neal holds the county record of Tallest Sheriff's Deputy.


=== Acting ===
Starting with Blue Chips and Kazaam, O'Neal appeared in films that were panned by some critics.O'Neal is one of the first African Americans to portray a major comic book superhero in a motion picture, having starred as John Henry Irons, the protagonist in the 1997 film Steel. He is preceded only by Michael Jai White, whose film Spawn was released two weeks before Steel.
O'Neal appeared as himself on an episode of Curb Your Enthusiasm, bedridden after Larry David's character accidentally tripped him while stretching, and in two episodes each of My Wife and Kids and The Parkers. He appeared in cameo roles in the films Freddy Got Fingered, Jack and Jill and Scary Movie 4. O'Neal appeared in the 311 music video for the hit single "You Wouldn't Believe" in 2001, in P. Diddy's video for "Bad Boy for Life", the video for Aaron Carter's "That's How I Beat Shaq", the video for Owl City's "Vanilla Twilight" and the video for Maroon 5's "Don't Wanna Know". O'Neal appeared in the movie CB4 in a small "interviewing" scene. O'Neal appeared in a SportsCenter commercial dressed in his Miami police uniform, rescuing Mike the Tiger from a tree. O'Neal reportedly wanted a role in X2 (2003), the second installment of the X-Men film series, but was ignored by the filmmakers. O'Neal appeared as Officer Fluzoo in the comedy sequel Grown Ups 2.
He voiced animated versions of himself on several occasions, including in the animated series Static Shock (2002; episode "Static Shaq"), in Johnny Bravo (1997; episode "Back on Shaq"), in Uncle Grandpa (2014; episode "Perfect Kid"), and in The Lego Movie (2014). He also had a voice over role in the 2013 film The Smurfs 2.


=== Video games ===
O'Neal was featured on the covers of video games NBA Live 96, NBA 2K6, NBA 2K7, NBA Showtime: NBA on NBC, NBA Hoopz, and NBA Inside Drive 2004. O'Neal appeared in the arcade version of NBA Jam (1993), NBA Jam (2003) and NBA Live 2004 as a current player and as a 1990s All-Star. O'Neal starred in Shaq Fu, a fighting game for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System and Sega Genesis. A sequel, Shaq Fu: A Legend Reborn, was released in 2018. O'Neal also appeared in Quest for the Code in 2002 as a voice actor, Backyard Basketball in 2004, Ready 2 Rumble Boxing: Round 2 as a playable boxer, and as an unlockable character in Delta Force: Black Hawk Down. O'Neal was also an unlockable character in UFC Undisputed 2010.


=== Television ===
O'Neal and his mother, Lucille Harrison, were featured in the documentary film Apple Pie, which aired on ESPN. O'Neal had a 2005 reality series on ESPN, Shaquille, and hosted a series called Shaq's Big Challenge on ABC.O'Neal appeared on NBA Ballers and NBA Ballers: Phenom, in the 2002 Discovery Channel special Motorcycle Mania 2 requesting an exceptionally large bike to fit his large size famed custom motorcycle builder Jesse James, in the first Idol Gives Back in 2007, on an episode of Fear Factor, and on an episode of MTV's Jackass, where he was lifted off the ground on Wee Man's back. O'Neal was a wrestling fan and made appearances at many WWE and AEW events.O'Neal was pranked on the MTV show Punk'd when a crew member accused him of stealing his parking space. After O'Neal and his wife went into a restaurant, Ashton Kutcher's crew members let the air out of O'Neal's tires. O'Neal and the crew member then got into an altercation and after Kutcher told O'Neal he had been Punk'd, O'Neal made an obscene gesture at the camera.O'Neal starred in a reality show called Shaq Vs. which premiered on August 18, 2009, on ABC. The show featured O'Neal competing against other athletes at their own sports.On July 14, 2011, O'Neal announced that he would join Turner Network Television (TNT) as an analyst on its NBA basketball games, joining Ernie Johnson, Kenny Smith, and Charles Barkley.He hosted the show Upload with Shaquille O'Neal which aired on TruTV for one season.
In September 2015 whilst promoting sportswear giant Reebok in South Korea, O'Neal joined the cast in the South Korean variety television show Off to School where he went to Seo Incheon High School. The show features various celebrities attending a selected high school as students for three days. The producer of the show, Kim No-eun said, "We've worked hard on our guest list this season, so Chu Sung Hoon will be appearing on a cable channel for the first time. Shaquille O'Neal will be on the show as well. We succeeded in casting him after a lot of effort. O'Neal will be visiting Korea for a promotion and will be visiting the school on the last day. He will have lunch with the students. We're even preparing a big match between Chu Sung Hoon and Shaquille O'Neal. We're specially preparing a uniform for Shaquille O'Neal."In October 2022, O'Neal signed a long-term contract extension with Warner Bros. Discovery Sports to continue as a host on Inside the NBA.


=== Advertising ===
O'Neal has made numerous appearances in television commercials, including several Pepsi commercials, such as one from 1995 which parodied shows like I Love Lucy (the "Job Switching" episode), Bonanza, and Woody Woodpecker. Other companies and products for which he has appeared in commercials include Reebok, Nestlé Crunch, Gold Bond, Buick, The General, Papa John's, Hulu, Epson, Carnival Cruises, Frosted Flakes, American Express, Vitamin Water, and IcyHot, among others.


=== Mixed martial arts ===
O'Neal began training in mixed martial arts (MMA) in 2000. At Jonathan Burke's Gracie Gym, he trained in boxing, jiu-jitsu, Muay Thai and wrestling. At the gym, he used the nickname Diesel. O'Neal challenged kickboxer and mixed martial artist Choi Hong-man to a mixed martial arts rules bout in a YouTube video posted on June 17, 2009. Choi replied to an email asking him if he would like to fight O'Neal saying "Yes, if there is a chance." Choi also responded to a question asking if O'Neal had a chance of winning with a simple "No." On August 28, 2010, in an interview at UFC 118 in Boston, O'Neal reiterated his desire to fight Choi.


=== Professional wrestling ===
A lifelong professional wrestling fan, O'Neal has made numerous appearances at televised events over the years for four different promotions. His favorite wrestlers are Tony Atlas, Junkyard Dog, André the Giant, and Brock Lesnar.In 1994, O'Neal made several appearances in World Championship Wrestling (WCW), including at the Bash at the Beach pay per view, where he presented the title belt to the winner of the WCW World Heavyweight Championship match between Hulk Hogan and Ric Flair. In July 2009, O'Neal served as the guest host for a live broadcast of WWE's Monday Night Raw. As part of the show, O'Neal got into a physical altercation with seven-foot-tall wrestler Big Show. In September 2012, O'Neal made a guest appearance on Total Nonstop Action Wrestling's Impact Wrestling program, where he had a backstage segment with Hulk Hogan.In April 2016, O'Neal participated in his first-ever match, when he was a surprise celebrity entry in the André the Giant Memorial Battle Royal at WrestleMania 32. O'Neal eliminated Damien Sandow, and had another confrontation with Big Show before being eliminated himself by most of the other wrestlers. In July at the 2016 ESPY Awards on the red carpet, Big Show and O'Neal had another brief confrontation. A match was proposed for WrestleMania 33, which O'Neal accepted. In January 2017, the two began calling each other out on social media, posting workout videos of themselves preparing for the potential match. After weeks of discussion, the match was cancelled. According to Dave Meltzer of Wrestling Observer Newsletter, the match was canceled due to monetary reasons, as both parties could not agree on a deal. Big Show later stated it was scheduling issues on O'Neal's part that caused the cancellation.On the November 11, 2020 episode of AEW Dynamite, Jade Cargill interrupted Cody Rhodes and teased the arrival of O'Neal in All Elite Wrestling (AEW). He made a cameo appearance on Being The Elite and it was later confirmed that O'Neal had been appearing backstage at recent AEW tapings, including Full Gear. He appeared on the December 9 episode of AEW Dynamite and addressed AEW in a sit-down interview with Tony Schiavone and Brandi Rhodes. At the end of the interview, O'Neal got water thrown on him by Brandi after telling her to get pointers from Cargill, who had broken Brandi's arm several weeks ago. On the March 3, 2021 episode of AEW Dynamite titled The Crossroads, O'Neal teamed with Jade Cargill to defeat Cody Rhodes and Red Velvet. During the match, O'Neal paid tribute to Brodie Lee with his signature gesture and powerbomb and was driven through two tables by Cody, who hit O'Neal with a flying crossbody tackle as O'Neal was standing on the ring apron, knocking O'Neal through the tables that were set up at ringside.


=== Business ventures ===
As of 2022 O'Neal is among the five wealthiest NBA players, with a net worth of $400 million. He was an active bond investor in the early 1990s but continued to wade into stocks and made investments in various companies such as General Electric, Apple, and PepsiCo. He described what has worked best for him in stock investing was where he felt a personal connection with the company. O'Neal refused to endorse Wheaties cereal because he preferred Frosted Flakes. He has also been an active real estate entrepreneur. O'Neal was looking to expand his business ventures with real-estate development projects aimed at assisting Orlando home owners facing foreclosure. His plans involved buying the mortgages of those who had fallen into foreclosure and then selling the homes back to them under more affordable terms. He would make a small profit in return, but wanted to make an investment in Orlando and help out homeowners.In conjunction with Boraie Development, O'Neal has developed projects in his hometown of Newark, New Jersey, including, CityPlex12 and One Riverview.O'Neal is on the advisory board for Tout Industries, a social video service startup company based in San Francisco. He received the position in return for breaking news of his NBA retirement on the service.In September 2013, O'Neal became a minority owner of the Sacramento Kings. In January 2022, O'Neal sold his stake in the Kings.O'Neal was an early investor in Google. In June 2015, he invested in technology startup Loyale3 Holdings Inc., a San Francisco brokerage firm whose website and mobile app enables companies to sell a piece of their IPOs directly to small investors who put up as a little as $100 and also allows investors to regularly buy small amounts of shares in already public companies.O'Neal is an investor for esports team NRG Esports. He has also appeared in television commercials promoting the Counter-Strike: Global Offensive league ELeague.O'Neal favors franchising businesses because of their simplicity and proven success. In late 2016, he purchased the Krispy Kreme location at 295 Ponce de Leon Avenue in Atlanta. O'Neal is also the global spokesperson for the company. He has owned and sold 155 Five Guys restaurants—about 10% of all locations—and owns 17 Auntie Anne's restaurants. O'Neal also owns 150 car washes, 40 health clubs, and the Big Chicken brand of chicken sandwiches.In 2018, O'Neal created the combination music festival, circus and carnival, Shaq's Fun House, in partnership with Medium Rare, which is held annually. The event usually features celebrity DJs and performers.In early 2019, O'Neal joined the Papa John's board of directors and invested in nine stores in the Atlanta area. In addition, he became the spokesperson for the company as part of the three-year contract.In 2021, O'Neal, among other high-profile athletes and celebrities, was a paid spokesperson for FTX, a cryptocurrency exchange. In November 2022, FTX filed for bankruptcy, wiping out billions of dollars in customer funds as well as O'Neal's personal stake in the company. He, alongside other spokespeople, is currently being sued for promoting unregistered securities through a class-action lawsuit. In February 2022, the U.S. 11th Circuit Court of Appeals ruled in a lawsuit against Bitconnect that the Securities Act of 1933 extends to targeted solicitation using social media.In 2022, O'Neal premiered his halloween event in Long Beach called Shaqtoberfest.


=== Legal issues ===
In August 2010, O'Neal was sued by his personal IT technician, Shawn Darling, after O'Neal had allegedly attempted to plant child pornography on Darling's computer. Darling claimed that O'Neal had originally tried to protect himself by hacking his mistresses' voicemails and deleting relevant messages. Darling also alleged that O'Neal had used law enforcement contacts to obtain restricted information on those mistresses, and that O'Neal subsequently threw his laptop into a lake to destroy possible evidence. In 2017, a trial court ruled that Darling had not filed the lawsuit "in good faith", and that the accusations made by Darling occurred after he had attempted to extort $12,000,000 from O'Neal in return for thousands of stolen emails and electronic files. Throughout the trial, Darling failed to submit adequate evidence to back up his claims. In 2021, the litigation ended with a court ruling that O'Neal was entitled to $412,914.50 in legal fees.In April 2014, O'Neal posted a photo on Instagram that showed himself mocking Jahmel Binion who suffers from Ectodermal dysplasia. O'Neal issued a public apology, stating that he and Binion had spoken and that he's "made a friend today". Binion would however go on to sue O'Neal for a sum larger than $25,000. In 2016, Binion withdrew the lawsuit after coming to a settlement agreement with O'Neal.


== Personal life ==
O'Neal was raised by a Baptist mother and a Muslim stepfather and said that they taught him both. Both Robin Wright in her book Rock the Casbah as well as the Los Angeles Times have identified O'Neal as a Muslim. However, O'Neal has said, "I'm Muslim, I'm Jewish, I'm Buddhist, I'm everybody 'cause I'm a people person."


=== Marriage and children ===
O'Neal married Shaunie Nelson on December 26, 2002. The couple have four children: Shareef (b. January 11, 2000), Amirah (b. November 13, 2001), Shaqir (b. April 19, 2003), and Me'arah (b. May 1, 2006). Nelson also has one son from a previous relationship, Myles. O'Neal has a daughter named Taahirah O'Neal (b. July 19, 1996) from a previous relationship with his ex-girlfriend Arnetta Yardbourgh.On September 4, 2007, O'Neal filed for divorce from Shaunie in a Miami-Dade Circuit court. Shaunie later said that the couple was back together and that the divorce was withdrawn. However, on November 10, 2009, Shaunie filed an intent to divorce, citing irreconcilable differences. The divorce was finalized in 2011. Shaq blames himself for the failed marriage and says he made mistakes and was "greedy."In 2015, Shareef was seen in high school basketball highlights as a 6-foot-7-inch (2.01 m) freshman power forward, and had been described to have "polar opposite playing style to his father" due to his more athletic build and better shooting range. Shareef played in college for the UCLA Bruins before transferring to LSU.


=== Post-marriage relationships ===
In summer 2010, O'Neal began dating reality TV star Nicole "Hoopz" Alexander. The couple resided at O'Neal's home in Sudbury, Massachusetts, and later split in August 2012.O'Neal began dating Laticia Rolle, a model, originally from Gardner, Massachusetts, in early 2014. They later split in March 2018.


=== Outside of basketball ===
In June 2005 when Hall of Fame center George Mikan died, O'Neal, who considered Mikan to be a major influence, extended an offer to his family to pay all of the funeral expenses, which they accepted.O'Neal is a member of Omega Psi Phi fraternity.
O'Neal is a 2009 inductee of the New Jersey Hall of Fame. O'Neal became a Freemason in 2011, becoming a member of Widow's Son Lodge No. 28 in Boston. O'Neal is a Prince Hall Freemason.On January 31, 2012, O'Neal was honored as one of the 35 Greatest McDonald's All-Americans.O'Neal's stepfather, Philip Arthur Harrison, died of a heart attack on September 10, 2013.O'Neal is a fan of the National Hockey League's New Jersey Devils, who play in his hometown of Newark, and has been seen at several games over the years. On January 11, 2014, O'Neal performed the ceremonial first puck and drove a Zamboni for a game between the Devils and the Florida Panthers. O'Neal is also a fan of English football club Northampton Town, and has posted videos of support to their official YouTube page.O'Neal is a fan of National Football League's Dallas Cowboys. According to him, football was actually his first sport and he wants to be like his idol, Ed "Too Tall" Jones.In 2016, O'Neal purchased a 14.3-acre, two-house compound in McDonough, Georgia for $1.15 million. It is around 30 miles southeast of Atlanta.O'Neal endorsed Republican New Jersey governor Chris Christie in his 2013 reelection bid, appearing in a television advertisement. He participated in a virtual rally for then-presidential candidate Joe Biden and voted for the first time during the 2020 presidential election.O'Neal turned down a $40 million deal with Reebok after hearing a mother complain about how expensive his shoes were.In July 2023 O'Neal purchased his first private jet; a $27 million Bombardier Challenger 650, complete with the iconic "Dunkman" logo on the tail.


== NBA career statistics ==


=== Regular season ===


=== Playoffs ===


== Awards and honors ==
NBA

Four-time NBA Champion
Three-time NBA Finals MVP
2000 NBA MVP
15-time NBA All-Star
Three-time NBA All-Star Game MVP
Eight-time All-NBA First Team
Two-time All-NBA Second Team
Four-time All-NBA Third Team
Three-time NBA All-Defensive Second Team
1993 NBA Rookie of the Year
1993 NBA All-Rookie First Team
Two-time NBA scoring champion
NBA 50th Anniversary Team
NBA 75th Anniversary Team
Number 32 retired by the Miami Heat
Number 34 retired by the Los Angeles LakersUSA Basketball

1996 Olympic Gold Medal
1994 FIBA World Cup
1994 FIBA World Cup MVP
1994 USA Basketball Male Athlete of the YearNCAA

1991 Adolph Rupp Trophy winner
Two-time Consensus All-American
Number 33 retired by the LSU TigersMedia

1991 Associated Press Player of the Year
1991 UPI Player of the Year
2005 BET Sportsman of the YearSports Emmy Awards

2012 – Outstanding Promotional AnnouncementAcademy Awards

2022 – Short Subject Documentary (as an executive producer of The Queen of Basketball)Halls of Fame

Naismith Memorial Hall of Fame (2016)
College Basketball Hall of Fame (2014)
FIBA Hall of Fame (2017)


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===
Shaq Diesel (1993)
Shaq Fu: Da Return (1994)
You Can't Stop the Reign (1996)
Respect (1998)
Gorilla Warfare (2023)


=== Unreleased albums ===
Shaquille O'Neal Presents His Superfriends, Vol. 1 (2001)


== Filmography ==


== Television credits ==


=== Awards and nominations ===


== Video game appearances ==


== Bibliography ==
Shaq Attaq! (1994)
A Good Reason to Look Up (1998)
Shaq and the Beanstalk and Other Very Tall Tales (1999)
Shaq Talks Back (2002)
Shaq Uncut: My Story (2011)
Little Shaq (2015)
Little Shaq Takes a Chance (2016)
Little Shaq: Star of the Week (2016)
Shaq's Family Style (2022)


== See also ==
List of National Basketball Association career scoring leaders
List of National Basketball Association career rebounding leaders
List of National Basketball Association career blocks leaders
List of National Basketball Association career turnovers leaders
List of National Basketball Association career free throw scoring leaders
List of National Basketball Association career minutes played leaders
List of National Basketball Association career playoff scoring leaders
List of National Basketball Association career playoff rebounding leaders
List of National Basketball Association career playoff blocks leaders
List of National Basketball Association career playoff turnovers leaders
List of National Basketball Association career playoff free throw scoring leaders
List of individual National Basketball Association scoring leaders by season
List of National Basketball Association players with most points in a game
List of National Basketball Association single-game blocks leaders
List of National Basketball Association seasons played leaders
List of National Basketball Association top rookie scoring averages
Highest-paid NBA players by season
Shaq–Kobe feud
List of NCAA Division I men's basketball career blocks leaders
List of NCAA Division I men's basketball season blocks leaders
List of NCAA Division I men's basketball season rebounding leaders
List of NCAA Division I basketball career triple-doubles leaders
List of Freemasons


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website 

Career statistics and player information from NBA.com  and Basketball-Reference.com
Shaquille O'Neal at IMDb 
Shaquille O'Neal's profile at Cagematch.net , Wrestlingdata.com , Internet Wrestling Database 
Shaquille O'Neal Archived September 16, 2012, at the Wayback Machine at Louisiana StateJoell Christopher Ortiz (born July 6, 1980) is an American rapper and a former member of the group Slaughterhouse. Ortiz grew up in the Cooper Park Houses in the East Williamsburg section of Brooklyn, New York, formerly signed to Dr. Dre's Aftermath Entertainment record label. He was featured in the Unsigned Hype column of the March 2004 issue of The Source Magazine and was also selected as Chairman's Choice in XXL Magazine. 
During the same time Joell also went on to win the 2004 EA Sports Battle which earned his song "Mean Business" a spot on the NBA Live 2005 soundtrack. The same year he was offered a contract to Jermaine Dupri's So So Def label. He released his debut album The Brick: Bodega Chronicles in 2007. Since then, he has released Free Agent (2011), House Slippers (2014) and Monday (2019). He is currently one half of the rap duo Crook and Joell with his former Slaughterhouse bandmate, Crooked I. Together, they released three studio albums.


== Biography ==
Joell Christopher Ortiz was born to Puerto Rican parents in Brooklyn, New York on July 6, 1980, where he grew up in East Williamsburg. He was formerly signed to Dr. Dre's Aftermath Entertainment record label.He was featured in the Unsigned Hype column of the March 2004 issue of The Source Magazine and was also selected as Chairman's Choice in XXL Magazine. During the same time Joell also went on to win the 2004 EA Sports Battle which earned his song "Mean Business" a spot on the NBA Live 2005 soundtrack.The same year he was offered a contract to Jermaine Dupri's So So Def label. The deal quickly went sour which caused Joell to start beef with Jermaine. Joell has since collaborated with KRS-One and Kool G. Rap.Joell released his street album called The Brick: Bodega Chronicles April 24, 2007, on Koch Records. The album was recorded while Joell was trying to get signed and going through some tough times personally.Although he was signed to Aftermath Entertainment, Dr. Dre allowed him to release the street album on Koch Records. The Brick features production by Showbiz, The Alchemist, Domingo, Ho Chi from Killahertz Productions, Lil' Fame of M.O.P., Novel, and Moss, among others. Guest spots include Big Daddy Kane, Styles P, Big Noyd, M.O.P, Akon, Immortal Technique, Grafh, Ras Kass, Stimuli, and Novel.Ortiz is one quarter of the supergroup Slaughterhouse who released their highly anticipated Slaughterhouse EP on February 8, 2011. The group released their second studio album, Welcome to: Our House, on August 28, 2012.


== Music career ==
He was on Kool G Rap's 2002 album "The Giancana Story" on the song "It's Nothing"


=== 2007–2010: The Brick: Bodega Chronicles and joining Slaughterhouse ===
Though signed to Aftermath, Ortiz released an album titled The Brick: Bodega Chronicles April 24, 2007 on Koch Records. The Brick features production by Showbiz, Street Radio, and The Alchemist, among others. Guest artists include rappers Big Daddy Kane, Styles P, Big Noyd, Akon, Immortal Technique, Grafh, and Ras Kass. Ortiz parted ways with Aftermath Entertainment on April 15, 2008.2009 was a busy year for Ortiz, as he released a number of freestyles and remixes leading up to the Road Kill mixtape. Among these was "Stressful" a song that remixed Drake's "Successful."Joe Budden reached out to Crooked I, Royce da 5'9", Joell Ortiz, and Nino Bless for a track titled "Slaughterhouse" on his digital release, Halfway House.Based on the reception of the track, they decided to form a super-group, minus Nino Bless, and named it after the first song they made together. They released numerous songs throughout early 2009, building a buzz for their self-titled album which was released through E1 on August 11, 2009. The album features production from Alchemist, DJ Khalil and Mr. Porter, plus guest appearances from Pharoahe Monch, K-Young, and The New Royales. In January 2011, the group signed to Shady Records and left E1 Entertainment.


=== 2010–2014: Free Agent and House Slippers ===
Ortiz started to have problems with E1 Entertainment and after almost a year, Ortiz left the label on November 5, 2010. In August 2010, Ortiz was in talks, about signing a deal with Steve Rifkind's label SRC Records. However the deal was never finished.In an October 31, 2010, interview on Conspiracy Worldwide Radio, Ortiz discussed his relationship with Eminem and the flood of record labels that have flocked to sign him after his Free Agent album was released. He also spoke of Eminem's excitement at working with him.During Slaughterhouse 2012 tour, the group stopped in Las Vegas, Nevada at Bootleg Kev's radio show, where they talked about their album Welcome to: Our House, and their work with Eminem. It was revealed that Ortiz signed with Shady Records as a solo act. In 2012, Joell as part of the group Slaughterhouse released their second album Welcome To Our House on August 28, 2012.On September 16, 2014, Ortiz released his third studio album House Slippers. The album features guest appearances from, among others,  B.o.B, Royce da 5'9", Joe Budden, Crooked I, and Maino. The album was supported by the singles "House Slippers" and "Music Saved My Life".In early 2019, before the release of his Monday album, Ortiz was featured in the song "Revenge" (along with fellow Slaughterhouse member Crooked I) on Cryptik Soul’s album Killer's Blood. Among the other artists on whose songs he has appeared as a featured guest are Brother Ali, Mega Ran, Mr. Capone-E, Playboy Tre and Chan Hays.


== Controversy ==
Following the release of his 2011 song "Big Pun Back", Ortiz received criticism from Liza Rios (Pun's widow), along with former Terror Squad members Cuban Link and Tony Sunshine, claiming that the song was "disrespectful" to the late rapper's memory. Ortiz claims the song was meant to be a tribute, and later, rapper and friend of Big Pun Fat Joe spoke up in his defense.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===
The Brick: Bodega Chronicles (2007)
Free Agent (2011)
House Slippers (2014)
That's Hip Hop (2016)
Monday (2019)
Autograph (2021)


=== Collaborative albums ===
Slaughterhouse (with Slaughterhouse) (2009)
Welcome to: Our House (with Slaughterhouse) (2012)
Human (with Illmind) (2015)
Mona Lisa (with Apollo Brown) (2018)
Gorilla Glue (with Fred the Godson & The Heatmakerz) (2019)
H.A.R.D. (with KXNG Crooked) (2020)
Rise & Fall of Slaughterhouse (with KXNG Crooked) (2022) 
Harbor City Season One (with KXNG Crooked) (2022)
JFKLAX (with KXNG Crooked) (2023)
Signature (with L'Orange) (2023)


== References ==


== External links ==

Official websiteDavid R. Styles (born November 28, 1974), better known by his stage name Styles P (also known mononymously as Styles), is an American rapper, best known as a member of hip hop group the Lox, alongside childhood friends Sheek Louch and Jadakiss. Along with the other members of the Lox, he is a founder of D-Block Records and was also a part of the Ruff Ryders Entertainment collective. In addition, he has released multiple albums and mixtapes as a solo MC. In 2002, he released his debut solo album A Gangster and a Gentleman, which contained the hit single "Good Times". The song peaked at number 22 on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart.He has gone on to release Time Is Money (2006), Super Gangster (Extraordinary Gentleman) (2007), Master of Ceremonies (2011), The World's Most Hardest MC Project (2012), Float (2013), Phantom and the Ghost (2014), A Wise Guy and a Wise Guy (2015), and G-Host (2018).


== Early life ==
David R. Styles was born November 28, 1974, in Corona, Queens, New York City, to a South African mother and a Jamaican father from Bed-Stuy. After his parents' divorce, Styles and his younger brother Gary moved to Yonkers with their mother. It was there he met lifelong friends Jadakiss and Sheek Louch. The trio bonded over their shared passion for hip hop and eventually formed a group known as the Lox in 1994.


== Career ==


=== 1994–2000: The Lox ===
As a trio, the Lox began rapping in the mid-1990s and started to build a steady underground following thanks to their performances and street freestyles. In their late teens, the trio met Mary J. Blige who was impressed with their lyrical content, and gave their demo to Sean "Diddy" Combs. Diddy immediately hired the trio to write for Bad Boy Records. After signing with Bad Boy, the Lox quickly started collaborating on hits with Diddy, the Notorious B.I.G., Mary J. Blige and Mariah Carey which gave them instant notoriety and status within the hip-hop and mainstream charts. In 1996 and 1997, the group wrote and performed on a number of Diddy hits, including "It's All About the Benjamins" and "I Got the Power", Mase's "24 Hrs. to Live", Mariah Carey's "Honey", the Notorious B.I.G.'s "Last Day" and Mary J. Blige's "Can't Get You Off My Mind". In 1997, the Lox received international acclaim when their tribute to the late Biggie Smalls, "We'll Always Love Big Poppa", was picked as the B-side track from Diddy's No Way Out album (3× Platinum) with the number one hit, "I'll Be Missing You". This single was the most played hit in 1997, which opened the door for the Lox's to write more of their own songs and eventually release their first album in January 1998 titled Money, Power & Respect. The album went on to be certified platinum, and, although the album was a chart-topping success, the group grew to feel that the glossy image and production style of Bad Boy Records conflicted with their grimier rap aesthetic. After trying and failing to get Puff Daddy to grant them a release from their contract, the group confronted him in his office, with Styles P throwing a chair at his own boss. After this, the group was granted their release and left Bad Boy to sign with Ruff Ryders Entertainment and Interscope Records.


=== 2000–2007: Ruff Ryders and solo albums ===
After releasing another Lox album, We Are the Streets and appearing on albums with other Ruff Ryders artists, Styles released his first solo album, A Gangster and a Gentleman, in 2002. The album was supported by the hit single, Good Times, which peaked at number 22 on the US Billboard Hot 100 and number 6 on the Billboard Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs. The song also received widespread airplay on the radio throughout 2002. In 2004, Styles was featured on an alternate version of Akon's hit debut single, Locked Up. Two years later, he released his second album, Time is Money on Ruff Ryders. In 2007, Styles would leave Ruff Ryders and Interscope to independently release his third studio album Super Gangster (Extraordinary Gentleman) on D-Block Records and Koch Records.


=== 2010–2014: The Green Ghost and various mixtapes ===
After recording many mixtapes Styles returned to the Hip-Hop scene by releasing two retail albums in 2010, The Green Ghost Project with DJ Green Lantern on Invasion Records and The Ghost Dub-Dime a retail mixtape on E1 Records (formally Koch Records). This began a string of annual retail releases with his fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh albums (2011's Master of Ceremonies, 2012's The World's Most Hardest MC Project, 2013's Float, and 2014's Phantom and the Ghost) all being released within a year of each other.


=== 2016–present: The Lox reunion ===
In 2016, the Lox released their first album in 16 years, Filthy America... It's Beautiful. The album reached number 6 on the Billboard Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums chart. It was followed by the release of the albums, G-Host (2018), Dime Bag (2018), S.P. the GOAT: Ghost of All Time (2019) and Presence (2019). Styles P and Dave East also released a collab album titled Beloved, in 2018. Styles P's 13th studio album, Styles David: Ghost Your Enthusiasm, was released on May 22, 2020.


== Personal life ==
Styles is a vegan.Styles married his wife Adjua on July 31, 1995. Together, they have two children, Noah (born 1998) and Tai (1995–2015), whom Adjua had from a previous relationship. Styles served as Tai's stepfather for the majority of her life, until she committed suicide in 2015.Styles' younger brother, Gary Quarles Styles, died in a car accident on May 13, 2001. Styles has made many references to Gary in his music, including the tribute song "My Brother", from his debut album A Gangster and a Gentleman.In July 2002, Styles was involved in an altercation at a New York nightclub that led to him stabbing a man in the buttocks. Styles surrendered himself to authorities on November 26, 2002, and began serving his eight-month sentence in the Westchester County Jail in Valhalla, New York, the same day. Styles was released from prison on August 4, 2003.Politically, Styles has publicly denounced Black Lives Matter and endorsed the 2020 re-election campaign of Donald Trump.


== Business ventures ==
Both Styles and Jadakiss launched a local juice bar called "Juices for Life" in 2011, there are currently six locations in New York. In 2018, Styles and his wife Adjua launched a local health food store called "Farmacy for Life".


== Other projects ==
Styles P released his first novel, Invincible, in 2010 through Random House Publishing Group. In 2011 he opened up a juice bar in the Bronx called Juices for Life with his business partners Nyger Rollocks and Leo Galvez. He released his EP with Currensy titled, #The1st28 on February 28, 2012.Styles P appeared on the sixteenth season of Marriage Boot Camp with his wife, Adjua in 2020.In February 2022, he was cast in the documentary series Everything's Gonna Be All White, airing on Showtime.


== Discography ==

Studio albums

A Gangster and a Gentleman (2002)
Time is Money (2006)
Super Gangster (Extraordinary Gentleman) (2007)
Master of Ceremonies (2011)
The World's Most Hardest MC Project (2012)
Float (2013)
Phantom and the Ghost (2014)
A Wise Guy and a Wise Guy (2015)
G-Host (2018)
Dime Bag (2018)
S.P. the GOAT: Ghost of All Time (2019)
Presence (2019)
Styles David: Ghost Your Enthusiasm (2020)
Ghosting (2021)
Penultimate: A Calm Wolf Is Still a Wolf (2023)Collaboration albums

The Green Ghost Project (with DJ Green Lantern) (2010)
#The1st28  (with Currensy) (2012)
The Seven (with Talib Kweli) (2017)
Vibes (with Berner) (2017)
Beloved (with Dave East) (2018)
Wreckage Manner (with Havoc) (2021)


== Bibliography ==
Invinicible by Styles P (2010: Random House Publishing Group, 240 pages) ISBN 978-0-345-50752-5. A Novel


== References ==


== External links ==
Official Site
Styles P on Instagram
Styles P Interview at Prefix
The DJ Booth: Styles P Interview
Styles P Interview
New Styles P interview with HipHopGame.comPaul Edward Huston (born April 2, 1967), better known by his stage name Prince Paul, is an American record producer, disc jockey and recording artist from Amityville, New York. Paul began his career as a DJ for Stetsasonic. He has worked on albums by Boogie Down Productions, Gravediggaz, MC Lyte, Big Daddy Kane and 3rd Bass, among others. Major recognition for Prince Paul came when he produced De La Soul's debut album 3 Feet High and Rising (1989), in which he pioneered new approaches to hip hop production, mixing and sampling, notably by including comedy sketches.
His first solo album, Psychoanalysis: What Is It?, came out in 1997, followed by a second album, A Prince Among Thieves, in 1999.


== Life and career ==


=== Early life ===
Paul Edward Huston was born on April 2, 1967 in Amityville, New York. Paul was interested in music from a young age and started collecting vinyl when he was five. According to his mother, he was mature for his age and tended to hang out with older friends.When he was in fifth grade he started DJing, using a makeshift setup of one Lafayette turntable hooked up to another turntable set and using the balance knob as a fader. In 1981, at age 14, Paul performed a DJ set at The Ace Center Amityville that helped him gain recognition. He did a routine with Trouble Funk's "Pump Me Up" which he later described as his "claim to fame." After The Ace Center performance, Paul started doing parties and tapes with Biz Markie while he was in 8th grade. At the same time, Paul's middle school music teacher was Everett Collins, a drummer for The Isley Brothers. Collins later introduced Paul to De La Soul member Maseo.


=== 1980s and 1990s ===
Prince Paul began performing with groups during his teenage years, first joining a group called Soul Brothers with his longtime friend Don Newkirk. Paul was one of the original members of Stetsasonic. He joined the group in 1984 after impressing Daddy-O with his routine in the "Brevoit Day Celebration" DJ battle in Brooklyn. Daddy-O was struck by Paul's energy, saying that he performed his routine with Liquid Liquid's song "Cavern", "like he was mad at the turntables". Paul credits Grandmaster Flash's song "Flash To The Beat" as the reason he purchased his drum machine.Prince Paul produced "The Gas Face" and "Brooklyn-Queens" on 3rd Bass' 1989 debut The Cactus Album. The original version of "The Gas Face" was recorded on 4-track cassette tape and started out as mistake. Paul wanted to change the beat after he realized the pattern was not what he had intended, but MC Serch and Pete Nice convinced him to keep it. The song was recorded on the 4th of July.Paul also worked on De La Soul's first three albums, 3 Feet High and Rising (1989), De La Soul Is Dead (1991), and Buhloone Mindstate (1993). De La Soul is Dead received a five mic album review from The Source. According to Paul, 3 Feet High and Rising (1989) had a budget of about $20,000 dollars and took a month and a half to make. In Brian Coleman's 2007 book Check the Technique, Paul reflected on his work with De La Soul by saying, "If there was ever a sign of the existence of God, De La Soul would be that proof to me. I've never had such a perfect fit in any other production situation."In 1990, Russell Simmons gave Prince Paul an imprint under his Def Jam label, however the only album, It Takes a Nation of Suckers to Let Us In by Resident Alien, was never officially released. It is available as an unofficial release, which is different to a bootleg.Along with Frukwan of Stetsasonic, Too Poetic of Brothers Grimm, and the RZA of Wu-Tang Clan, Prince Paul formed the group Gravediggaz. They recorded a demo together in 1991 and released their first album Niggamortis/6 Feet Deep in 1994 on Gee Street Records. Before signing a deal with Gee Street, Eazy-E wanted to release the album on Ruthless Records. Paul flew to Los Angeles to have a meeting with Eazy-E and Jerry Heller but was unimpressed with the contract and declined. After the group signed to Gee Street, Paul estimated that it took them about six months to complete the album.Prince Paul also contributed to several other projects during this time period. He produced three songs for Boogie Down Productions' 1992 album Sex and Violence, though later expressed frustration that the group released the album before he had finalized and polished those tracks. In 1995, Paul and Teo Macero collaborated to produce the solo debut from guitarist Vernon Reid, and in 1996 he appeared on the compilation album America Is Dying Slowly. Additionally, Paul joined forces with Amityville rapper Superstar to launch a supergroup called Horror City. Paul produced a Horror City album, but proved unable to successfully market the album to any record labels. Ultimately, Paul decided to Horror City as a free download in 2010.In 1996, during the early recording sessions for Stakes Is High, De La Soul and Prince Paul decided to part ways.  Although Paul was not involved in the making of the album, he has praised it in several interviews, once saying, "I was going through a serious transition period in my life when that album dropped. I was trying to figure out the next thing I was going to do; I was going through a custody case for my son, and I was running out of money. There were a lot of things going on at the time and in a sense, that album pulled me through everything."After splitting from De La Soul, Paul released two solo albums in the following years: Psychoanalysis: What Is It? (1996) and A Prince Among Thieves (1999). These albums featured a wide range of rappers, including Big Daddy Kane, Xzibit, Kool Keith, and Everlast. When Paul was recording Psychoanalysis he thought his career was over and had a hard time finding people who wanted to be involved with the project. Many of the vocals were provided by friends of his from outside the music industry. Years later he recalled thinking, "Some people might get butt-hurt about it, but so what? It's probably the last record I'll make anyway," during the recording of "Beautiful Night (Manic Psychopath)". The song is very dark and deals with date rape, racism, and violence.
According to Paul, he originally proposed the idea for A Prince Among Thieves to Russell Simmons in the early 1990s but Simmons was not interested. While describing his goals for the album in an interview he said, "I wanted to make a movie on wax. I wanted to make an adults' kid album." To prepare for the album he watched many B movies and tried to use scenes from various films as inspiration. On A Prince Among Thieves, Paul also repurposed some of the beats he had initially composed for Horror City. In addition to the extensive list of rappers on the album, Paul reached out to Vanilla Ice to perform on "Handle Your Time" with Sadat X and Xzibit. He also reached out to The Notorious B.I.G. about playing a role on the album and was supposed to meet up with him the night he was murdered.Prince Paul formed the duo Handsome Boy Modeling School with Dan the Automator. Their 1999 debut album, So... How's Your Girl?, featured Sean Lennon, Del the Funky Homosapien, Alec Empire, and Don Novello.


=== 21st century ===
Paul contributed to multiple projects in the year 2000. His work from that year includes the song "The Fantabulous Rap Extravaganza" on Deltron 3030's self-titled album, as well as It's Very Stimulating, the debut EP by MC Paul Barman.
Prince Paul's 2003 album Politics of the Business again featured many guests such as Chuck D, Ice-T, The Beatnuts, and Wordsworth. The latter also collaborated on a track Paul composed for The SpongeBob SquarePants Movie soundtrack. Paul followed this project with a second Handsome Boy Modeling School album, White People, in 2004. His next solo album was Itstrumental (2005). It encompasses a range of genres, relying heavily on past samples, especially from A Prince Among Thieves, and combining them with lighthearted skits about his depression. As of 2023, Itstrumental is Paul's most recent studio album.
Paul continued to collaborate throughout the 2000s. In 2005, he produced the album The Art of Picking Up Women by the Dix, which combines some of hip-hop's misogyny and boasting with 1960s-style R&B. He also collaborated with Parliament, Don Newkirk, and Talking Heads keyboardist Bernie Worrell to release an album titled Turn My Teeth Up! (2007) under the moniker Baby Elephant. Another project Paul produced during this period was Montezuma's Revenge, a 2009 album by Souls of Mischief. On this album, Paul extensively used vintage equipment such as the Emu SP-12, Ensoniq ASR-10, Akai MPC-60 and an Akai MPC-2000.At the 48th Annual Grammy Awards in 2006, Prince Paul was awarded the Grammy Award for Best Comedy Album for his work on Chris Rock's Never Scared.In 2012, Paul spoke openly in an interview about the possibility of doing another De La Soul album after Maseo had made some public comments about a reunion. In the interview, Paul states that he asked the members of De La Soul to work on a new album on and off since 1999. Though he wanted to do a reunion at one time, it seemed in the interview he had moved past the idea, partially because of the far more restrictive sampling laws that exist today. He said, "It's nice to think about it, but I kind of like where we left it. There would be so many expectations. For me to do another De La record, I don't think I could really live up to it. Especially in a day and age where I can't openly sample like that."Paul continued to provide occasional contributions to various products in the 2010s and 2020s. In 2016, he collaborated with Brazilian hip hop fusion group Broozkill! on an album titled Throwback to the Future. In 2017 Prince Paul helped to score Mogul, a Gimlet Media podcast about hip-hop scene-maker Chris Lighty. In 2020, Prince Paul co-produced the Gorillaz song "Pac-Man" for the band's Song Machine web series.In 2017, Prince Paul joined the Creators Advisory Board of Tracklib. In an interview with Tracklib, Prince Paul stated that "I know Tracklib will help (producers) because it will give everybody an opportunity to sample without having to look over their shoulder."


== Equipment ==
Paul has talked about his fondness for vintage equipment in several interviews. One of his favorite pieces of vintage equipment is the Akai S900, which he credits for having a unique sound, saying, "Even though it's big and bulky, nothing sounds like that. It's pretty flexible, it's easy to work, and it's easy to truncate your sample and get things tight...When you look at all this new technology, everything sounds very sterile. Everything is clean and super quiet. It kind of lacks something. When I plug that in, it's like, 'Wow, this is hip hop.'"


== Record collection ==
He is known for sampling from a wide range of genres. Rapper Biz Markie once said of Paul's production style, "Prince Paul's contribution to hip-hop is that you could use records that weren't by James Brown or just break-beats."


== Style and influences ==
Unlike the vast majority of hip-hop producers during the 1980s and early 1990s, Paul explored many genres outside of funk and soul to extract samples.Chris Rock listed the Buhloone Mindstate album at number ten on his "Top 25 Albums" list. He credited the album as helping to shape him as a comedian. In 1999, Rock appeared on Paul's A Prince Among Thieves. Later in 2005, Rock's debut album was produced by Paul.Paul credits The Bomb Squad and Public Enemy as being a significant influence on early De La Soul production, saying, "Early Public Enemy production used layers upon layers and layers, and their arrangements were always super duper incredible to me. We were kind of like students to what they did." In addition to The Bomb Squad, he also lists George Clinton, Dr. Dre, Rick Rubin, and Bernie Worrell as his major influences.While Paul continues to utilize samples, he has expanded his production to include live instrumentation, including guitar, bass guitar, and several analog keyboards. To combine elements of sampling and live instrumentation, Paul now re-plays some of his samples with instruments. In a 2010 interview he described the process by saying, "I’ve gotten to the point now where I’ll re-play samples with instruments. I learned how to interpolate, change the sound, and dust it out so that when I’m re-playing certain samples, it sounds like a direct sample from a record."Paul has credited the process of working with Dan the Automator on the Handsome Boy Modeling School project as helping him learn a great deal about production.


== Discography ==


=== Solo albums ===
1996: Psychoanalysis: What Is It? (WordSound Records, later reissued by Tommy Boy/Warner Bros. Records in 1997 with bonus cuts)
1999: A Prince Among Thieves (Tommy Boy/Warner Bros. Records)
2003: Politics of the Business (Razor & Tie)
2005: Itstrumental (Female Fun Records)
2005: Hip Hop Gold Dust (Antidote)


=== Collaborative albums ===
1986:  On Fire (Stetsasonic)
1988:  In Full Gear (Stetsasonic)
1989:  3 Feet High and Rising (De La Soul)
1991:  Blood, Sweat & No Tears (Stetsasonic)
1991:  De La Soul Is Dead (De La Soul)
1992:  It Takes a Nation of Suckas to Let Us In (Resident Alien) (later released as a free download)
1993:  Buhloone Mindstate (De La Soul)
1994:  Niggamortis/6 Feet Deep (Gravediggaz)
1995:  Prince Paul presents Horror City  (Horror City) (later released as a free download)
1999:  So... How's Your Girl? (Handsome Boy Modeling School)
2000:  It's Very Stimulating (MC Paul Barman)
2004:  White People (Handsome Boy Modeling School)
2005:  The Art of Picking Up Women (The Dix)
2008:  Baby Loves Hip Hop presents The Dino 5 (Dino 5)
2012:  Negroes on Ice (Negroes on Ice)
2016:  Throwback to the Future (BROOKZILL!)


== Awards and nominations ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Prince Paul discography at Discogs 
Prince Paul RBMA video lecture sessionFelicia Pearson (born May 18, 1980) is an American television actress, rapper, published author and convicted murderer. She played Felicia "Snoop" Pearson on The Wire and wrote a 2007 memoir, Grace After Midnight, detailing her troubled childhood and time in prison for second-degree murder.


== Early life ==
Pearson was born in Baltimore, Maryland, the daughter of two incarcerated drug addicts, and was raised in an East Baltimore foster home. Born premature and weighing three pounds, she was not expected to live.  She was so small that she was fed with an eyedropper until she could be fed normally. According to her memoir, Grace After Midnight, she met her biological parents very few times, her mother was a crack addict, and her father was an armed robber. As a result of this, she decided to go by her foster family's surname.
Pearson was a tomboy from a young age and worked as a drug dealer as a teenager. At the age of fourteen, she was convicted of second degree murder after the shooting of a girl named Okia Toomer. Pearson was sentenced to two eight-year terms, to be served consecutively, at the Maryland Correctional Institution for Women in Jessup, Maryland. She was released after six and a half years.
Pearson said her life turned around at the age of eighteen, when Arnold Loney, a local drug dealer who looked out for her and sent her money in prison, was shot and killed. He had coined her nickname "Snoop," because she reminded him of Charlie Brown's beagle Snoopy in the comic strip Peanuts. While in prison, Pearson earned her GED. She was released in 2000, and landed a local job fabricating car bumpers, but was fired after two weeks when her employer learned she had a prison record.


== Career ==


=== Television ===
Pearson met Michael K. Williams, who played Omar Little on The Wire, in a Baltimore club. He invited her to come to the set one day, and introduced her to the writers and the producers. After subsequent auditions, she was offered a role in the series. For her performance in The Wire, Stephen King called her "perhaps the most terrifying female villain to ever appear in a television series."Her appearance on the show kickstarted her acting career, leading to appearances in music videos for R&B singer Lil' Mo's "Dem Boyz"; rapper Rick Ross' "The Boss" and "Here I Am"; rapper Ace Hood's "Cash Flow"; A$AP Ferg's "Shabba (feat ASAP Rocky)" and Snoop Dogg's "So Many Pros." She has appeared in the Spike Lee films Da Sweet Blood of Jesus, and Chi-Raq, and in the CBS police procedural drama Blue Bloods, titled "Good Cop Bad Cop."Pearson joined the cast of the VH1 reality television series Love & Hip Hop: New York for its seventh and eighth seasons.


=== Music ===
Pearson is featured in the song "It's a Stick Up" with Tony Yayo and Mazaradi Fox, with its music video featuring clips from The Wire.


=== Volunteer work ===
Pearson has volunteered as a prison visitor, worked on anti-violence and literacy campaigns for youth, and supported The Stay Strong Foundation.


== Personal life ==
On March 10, 2011, Pearson and sixty others were arrested and charged with drug offenses. The arrest was made during a predawn raid at her home in Baltimore, following a five-month DEA operation. At the first hearing after Pearson's arrest, Judge John Addison Howard denied her bail due to Pearson's acting ability, stating: "Well, you can change your appearance, I've seen the episodes of The Wire in which you appear. You look very different than you do here today, and I'm not talking about the jumpsuit, I'm talking about your general appearance."  After a month in jail, Pearson was offered bail of $50,000 on April 8, 2011.  In August 2011, she pleaded guilty to the charges the day before her trial was to begin. She was sentenced to a suspended seven-year prison term, with credit for time served, and given three years of supervised probation.Pearson is a lesbian.


== Filmography ==


== References ==


== Further reading ==
"The Wire Week: Felicia Pearson (Snoop)". All Hip Hop News. January 10, 2007. Retrieved August 16, 2007.


== External links ==
Felicia Pearson at IMDbSandra Jacqueline Denton (born 9 November 1966 ), better known by her stage name Pepa or Pep, is a Jamaican-American rapper, best known for her work as a member of the female rap trio Salt-N-Pepa. Denton starred in The Salt-N-Pepa Show, a reality TV series focusing on reforming the group which aired on the VH1 network in 2008. Since January 2016, Denton has appeared as a supporting cast member on the music reality television show Growing Up Hip Hop which airs on We TV.


== Early life ==
Sandra Jacqueline Denton was born in Kingston, Jamaica to Charles and Enid Denton (née Hyacinth), the youngest of eight children. Denton lived on a farm in Jamaica with her grandmother until she was six years old. Denton's family moved to Queens, New York, when she was three; and she later joined them. Denton has been a performer since childhood. Denton was molested as a child. Denton released a book about her life in 2008 entitled Let's Talk About Pep in which she talked about being molested, her many abusive relationships, and how Salt-N-Pepa formed.In 1979, 15-year-old Denton was sent to live with her elder sister Patsy in Logan, Utah, when her family home in Queens caught fire and so she could have a better life. According to Denton, she was the only Black student attending Logan High School during that time. Denton became inspired by rock music; citing AC/DC and Led Zeppelin as her inspirations during her time in Utah. After a year in Utah, Denton returned to New York, later graduating from Springfield Gardens High School.
Denton worked as telephone solicitors at a Sears in College Point. She met Cheryl James in the Sears lunchroom. They both were also enrolled as nursing students at Queensborough Community College.


== Career ==
With the production by Hurby "Luv Bug" Azor whom she and James met while working as customer service representatives at Sears, James and Denton released a single called "The Showstopper" which became a moderate R&B hit in late 1985. They were joined with Latoya Hanson who was the original DJ of the group. Shortly after in 1986, Deidra "Spinderella" Roper joined as the group's DJ as a full-length debut album, Hot, Cool & Vicious, was being released. The trio released a total of five studio albums: Hot, Cool, and Vicious (1986), A Salt with a Deadly Pepa (1988), Blacks' Magic (1990), Very Necessary (1993), and Brand New (1997), plus several greatest hits albums. Salt-N-Pepa disbanded in 2002, several months after their Brand New album was released on Red Ant Records. Denton's co-group member Cheryl James had stated she was ready to leave the music industry. The trio reunited for a performance on VH1's Hip Hop Honors program on 22 September 2005. In 2005, Denton was a cast member of VH1's The Surreal Life (season 5).Denton's acting credits also include the motion picture Joe's Apartment, an appearance in the HBO movie First Time Felon, and a stint as Officer Andrea Phelan on the HBO drama, Oz. She starred on The Surreal Life: Fame Games. Salt-N-Pepa reformed in 2008, and are still in the process of releasing an album since reforming as they work out past issues. Denton teamed up with James for VH1's The Salt-N-Pepa Show. She starred in her own reality show on the network entitled Let's Talk About Pep, word-play on the group's hit song "Let's Talk About Sex". She can be heard speaking Jamaican Patois in the song "Need U Bad" by Jazmine Sullivan. In August 2008, Denton released her autobiography, which was also entitled Let's Talk About Pep. It was co-written by Karen Hunter, and it offered a look behind the fame, family, failures, and successes of her life in one of hip-hop's most successful groups. It features an introduction by Queen Latifah, and an epilogue by Missy Elliott. To accommodate the book, Pepa launched her own social network for her fans. On 23 October 2008, Salt-N-Pepa performed at the BET Hip Hop Awards. In January 2011, Denton appeared in an episode of the TBS sitcom Are We There Yet? as Tammy, a woman who falls for the Terry Crews character of Nick. Denton joined the reality television show Growing Up Hip Hop as a supporting cast member in January 2016 along with her daughter Egypt (a main cast member) and niece Tahira Francis.


== Personal life ==
Denton once dated and was engaged to rapper Prince Markie Dee sometime during the mid-1980s. On 6 July 1990, Denton gave birth to her first child, a son she had with New York rapper Tyran "Tah-Tah" Moore whom she named Tyran Denton Jr. She made a guest appearance on Ricki Lake in 1994, teaching teenage girls the responsibilities of being a mother. Denton was the owner of HollyHood, a retail clothing store in the Buckhead section of Atlanta, Georgia, which opened in November 1995. On 2 April 1999, Denton married Treach (whose real name is Anthony Criss) of the rap group Naughty by Nature at a Kansas City tattoo parlor after dating on and off for seven years. Their wedding ceremony was held at their home in Morristown, New Jersey, on 24 July 1999. Denton and Treach had one daughter, Egypt Jahnari Criss (born 2 September 1998). After allegations of physical abuse inflicted by Treach, they divorced in 2001.


== Discography ==

Studio albumsHot, Cool & Vicious (1986)
A Salt with a Deadly Pepa (1988)
Blacks' Magic (1990)
Very Necessary (1993)
Brand New (1997)


== Filmography ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Pepa on Twitter 
Sandra Denton at IMDbPercee P is an American rapper from the Bronx, New York. He first gained recognition in the hip-hop community in the early 1990s for his fast-paced, intricate rhymes and unique flow. He is known for his collaborations with other notable hip-hop artists, including Lord Finesse and Madlib. Percee P has released several albums throughout his career, including Perseverance in 2007. He continues to be a respected figure in the underground hip-hop scene.


== Career ==
In 2007, Percee P released his debut studio album, Perseverance, on Stones Throw Records. Entirely produced by Madlib, it featured guest appearances from Aesop Rock, Chali 2na, Diamond D, Guilty Simpson, and Prince Po.He has also collaborated with a number of musicians, including Lord Finesse, Kool Keith, Jurassic 5, and Jedi Mind Tricks.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===
Perseverance (2007)


=== Compilation albums ===
Now and Then (2004)
Legendary Status (2005)
Perseverance: The Remix (2007)
Oh No vs. Percee P (2008) (with Oh No)


=== Singles ===
"Now They Wanna See Me" / "Lung Collapsing Lyrics" / "Puttin' Heads to Bed" (1992)
"Nowhere Near Simple" / "Don't Cum Strapped" (1996)
"Put It on the Line" (2005)
"Percekusion" / "NY to the UK" (2005)
"Throwback Rap Attack" (2006)
"Watch Your Step" (2007)
"The Hand That Leads You" (2007)
"No Time for Jokes" / "Last of the Greats" (2008)
"Get Down" (2013)


=== Guest appearances ===
Lord Finesse - "Yes You May" from Return of the Funky Man (1992)
Kool Keith & Godfather Don - "You're Late" from Cenobites (1993)
Maestro Fresh-Wes - "Pray to da East" from Naaah, Dis Kid Can't Be from Canada?!! (1994)
Shazam X - "Respect Costs More Than Money" (1996)
Aesop Rock - "Wake Up Call" from Music for Earthworms (1997)
C-Rayz Walz - "Stupid Def" from The Prelude (2001)
Jurassic 5 - "A Day at the Races" from Power in Numbers (2002)
Jaylib - "The Exclusive" from Champion Sound (2003)
Wildchild - "Knicknack" from Secondary Protocol (2003)
Jedi Mind Tricks - "Walk With Me" from Visions of Gandhi (2003)
Edan - "Torture Chamber" from Beauty and the Beat (2005)
Four Tet - "A Joy" from Remixes (2006)
Mekalek - "The Gritty Bop" from Live and Learn (2006)
Wildchild - "The League" from Jack of All Trades (2007)
DJ Babu - "SBX2LAX2OX" from Duck Season Vol. 3 (2008)
The Heliocentrics - "Distant Star" (2008)
Connie Price and the Keystones - "International Hustler", "Thundersounds", and "Catatonia (Get Em)" from Tell Me Something (2008); "Four Pound." from Lucas High (2019)
Grip Grand - "Paper Cup" from Brokelore (2008)
Jazz T - "Percekusion (Boot Remix)" from All City Kings (2008)
Terra Firma - "Hall of Fame" from Music to Live By (2008)
Ivan Ives - "Kill Em" from Newspeak (2009)
The Whitefield Brothers - "Reverse" from Earthology (2010)
Beat Bop Scholar - "Authentic Minded Intro" from Authentic Minded (2012)
Nix - "Encore" from The Nixtape (2012)
Substance Abuse - "Paper Tigers" from Background Music (2013)
Dudley Perkins - "Hearing Test" from Dr. Stokley (2013)
Kid Tsu - "Down Pat" from The Chase (2013)
The Extremities featuring Ghettosocks - "Keep On" from Instruments (2014)
Namek - "Universal Energy" from Namifest Destiny (2014)


== References ==


== External links ==
Percee P discography at DiscogsPeter O. Phillips (born June 21, 1970), better known by his stage name Pete Rock, is an American music producer, DJ and rapper. He is widely recognized as one of the greatest hip hop producers of all time, and is often mentioned alongside DJ Premier, RZA, and Q-Tip as one of the mainstays of 1990s East Coast hip hop production. He rose to prominence in the early 1990s as one half of the critically acclaimed group Pete Rock & CL Smooth. Early on in his career, he was also famed for his remix work.
After the duo went their separate ways, Rock continued with a solo career that has garnered him worldwide respect, though little in the way of mainstream success. Along with groups such as Stetsasonic, Gang Starr, A Tribe Called Quest and The Roots, Rock played a major role in the merging of elements from jazz into hip hop music (also known as jazz rap). Pete Rock is also the older brother and younger cousin, respectively, of rappers Grap Luva and Heavy D.


== Biography ==


=== Early life ===
Pete Rock was born in The Bronx in New York City, New York the fourth of five children born to Jamaican immigrant parents. His family moved to Mount Vernon, New York when he was seven years old. During high school, he met his future recording partner CL Smooth. He briefly attended John Jay College of Criminal Justice but was not a serious student and left to focus on his music career. According to Rock, his father was also a part-time DJ who had an impressive record collection. Rock would often accompany his father to a cricket club called Wembley in The Bronx and watch as he spun records for the guests. His first job was as a paperboy, in his neighborhood.


== Solo career ==
Rock oversaw the production of Jay Stay Paid, a posthumous album by the producer J Dilla, released June 2, 2009, on Nature Sounds. Following that, Pete Rock joined Kanye West in Hawaii, who traveled there to work on the latter's fifth album, My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy. In addition, he and DJ Premier have announced that they are working on a joint album together, although further details are unknown. In London, he confirmed that Big Pooh and C.L. Smooth will be on his half of the VS album and he planned on releasing five albums in 2011, including reuniting with C.L. Smooth for a third album, and dropping his fourth album on Nature Sounds. His next few collaborative albums are both due for a summer release with Monumental first then with Camp Lo's "80 Blocks From Tiffanys" LP. In an April 2011 interview on Conspiracy Worldwide Radio, Pete Rock discussed his new solo work including his album with DJ Premier, as well as exploring the fact that he has had numerous beats rejected by Eminem over the years  Pete Rock Uncensored Radio Interview. In an August 2011 interview, he has confirmed the completion of the Camp Lo album "80 Blocks from Tiffany's" and that he is currently working on production for Torae's album, Elzhi & his own solo album PeteStrumentals 2. Pete Rock announced on Twitter that PeteStrumentals 2 is indeed confirmed finished and scheduled for a 2015 release. The project was released on June 23, 2015, on the indie label Mello Music Group. On January 2, 2019, Rock posted a trailer video on his Instagram page announcing that new works will be coming soon, including Return of the SP1200 (which was released on April 13, 2019, exclusively on vinyl (Record Store Day) and released digitally on April 26, 2019), PeteStrumentals 3 (a continuation to 2001's PeteStrumentals and 2015's 2), Don't Smoke Rock 2 (also a continuation to Don't Smoke Rock) featuring Smoke DZA, and an album with rapper Skyzoo. Rock confirms to Okayplayer that he is working on his sixth instrumental album called PeteStrumentals 4, another continuation to Rock's previous PeteStrumentals series releases. The project was finished on June 30 and it's scheduled for a 2022 release on Tru Soul records. The project was released on March 31, 2022.


== Affiliates ==


=== Proteges ===
Through the years, Rock has helped to jump-start the careers of several artists. His first project outside of Pete Rock & CL Smooth was the hardcore duo YG'z, who released an EP called Street Nigga in 1993, with four out of the six tracks produced by Rock; however, they were quickly dropped from their deal with Reprise Records. His next venture, INI, was a group featuring Rock, his younger brother Grap Luva, Ras G and rapper Rob-O. They released a single, "Fakin' Jax", through Elektra Records in 1995, before their debut album, Center of Attention, was shelved by the label. The other two members continue to record solo material, albeit only sporadically. In an interview Rock elaborated on the situation:

We finished the album, turned it into Elektra and they never put it out, they only put out a single. Sylvia [Rhone] really didn't cooperate, she didn't break bread with me when it came down to resolving that. It was all about her changing everything around. She wanted to change my whole sound. When she said, "You gotta make a beat like Puffy", I just knew it wasn't going to work out.


=== Relationship with CL Smooth ===
Since their split in 1995, Pete Rock's relationship with CL Smooth has been highly unpredictable. Although the pair briefly united for the reflective "Da Two" from Rock's Soul Survivor album in 1998, they avoided entertaining requests for a reunion album until 2001, when they once again teamed up for "Back on Da Block" from Rock's PeteStrumentals. In their interviews during this period, it appeared as though a new album was underway. As Rock would explain:

We've been on tour, we know every rhymer and producer in this business. We've influenced people, even people we've never met have said that we changed the face of hip-hop. So we're going to try to do some more.
The pair went on a short international tour culminating in their well-received show at London's Jazz Cafe; however, soon after this they declined to comment any further on the new album, which never materialized (although Smooth did make three separate appearances on Soul Survivor II).  Eventually, Smooth would confirm rumors of a rift in an interview with AllHipHop.com, in which he appeared angry and frustrated with his former partner, saying "I didn't ask him to be a superhero" and "I'm not the problem". In an interview taken in December 2006, Rock ruled out any further collaborations with Smooth but stated that he holds no grudges against his former partner.


== Musical style ==


=== Production ===
Pete Rock creates beats from samples, the majority of which are taken from obscure R&B, funk, and jazz records. This paying true homage to the Black American musical traditions that are the foundation and origins of Hip-Hop music. Early on in his career he would also sample drum breaks such as Black Heat's "Zimba Ku" for Heavy D & The Boyz's "Letter To The Future". Pete Rock heavily used the E-mu SP-1200 as well as the Akai S950—later moving onto using the MPC—for his productions. Pete Rock tends to use the samples as palettes for his beats, chopping (cutting the sample into smaller parts), filtering (altering the frequencies of the sample), and layering several samples, often within the same song. While this technique was applied long before Rock (on De La Soul's Three Feet High and Rising or the work of The Bomb Squad for example), Rock's work is distinctive for the way in which he uses samples to achieve a hazy, droning effect. He is also noted for his resonant basslines, horn samples, and gritty sounding drums. His beats often sound as though they were being played from an old vinyl record; he samples many of his sounds straight off these records. He frequently recorded at Greene St. Recording in Manhattan, having liked the equalizer that was used there, which gave many of his productions a wah-wah effect.Another trait of his, more so in the earlier part of his career, is the way he uses horn samples to supplement his grooves. On "They Reminisce Over You (T.R.O.Y.)", Rock uses a horn sample from Tom Scott's "Today"; he has also used horns on  "Straighten It Out", Public Enemy's "Shut 'Em Down", Rah Digga's "What They Call Me", and A.D.O.R.'s "Let It All Hang Out".
Along with Gang Starr, The Roots and A Tribe Called Quest, Pete Rock played a large role in the fusing of jazz and funk music into hip hop. The aforementioned "Reminisce..." withstanding, Rock used many jazz samples on his album Mecca and The Soul Brother, such as Cannonball Adderley's "Country Preacher", for the song "Return of the Mecca", or "Capricorn" for the song "In the House" from The Main Ingredient. Pete Rock's heavy use of intro and outro beats has also been widely influential. To introduce feature songs, he often plays a short instrumental excerpt, completely different from the rest of the song.  Aside from their role as transitions, these are widely regarded as a way of displaying his large collection and as a challenge to other hip-hop producers to identify the records that the breaks come from. Mecca & the Soul Brother and The Main Ingredient use intro/outro beats on nearly every track to great effect, and the tradition continues to the present on Rock's recent releases.


=== Remixes ===
"Another Pete Rock Remix" is Pete Rock's trademark catchphrase, heard on countless singles that he has remixed. In addition to hip-hop artists he has done remix work for artists from other genres such as his 1995 remix of "Before You Walk Out Of My Life" for R&B singer Monica. In 1992 he collaborated with Mary J. Blige on the What's the 411? single "Reminisce", which utilized the same sample from his own single "They Reminisce Over You (T.R.O.Y.)". Rock claims to have done several high-profile remixes that remain unreleased, including one of Madonna's "Secret". He also claims to have produced the original beat for The Notorious B.I.G.'s "Juicy" and that it was recreated by P. Diddy and Poke (of Tone & Poke fame), without consent. However, he was invited to produce the remix, which utilizes the same sample as the original—Mtume's "Juicy Fruit". Although he received no official producer credit, he made the original demo beat for A Tribe Called Quest's "Jazz (We've Got)", which was then recreated by Q-Tip on the album The Low End Theory. He remixed Public Enemy's "Shut 'em Down" and "Nighttrain" in the same day, starting at 12pm and finishing at 12am.Up until 2003, he created all of his productions on the E-mu SP-1200, thereafter using the Akai MPC2000XL. He also has a collection of about 90,000 records and looks for records at least once a week. Pete Rock was one of nine artists who participated in thetruth.com's Remix Project, where he remixed the Sunny Side song "Magical Amount".


=== Influence ===
Pete Rock himself being overwhelmingly influenced by Black American musical traditions of Soul, Jazz, and R&B music, was able to pay it forward. Pete Rock has had a considerable impact on a number of record producers who have emerged in the hip hop scene since the late 1990s. Critics have favorably compared Detroit producer J Dilla and North Carolina's 9th Wonder to Rock; both of them worked with Rock during their recording careers. Several of the comparisons stem from the fact that these producers have created the bulk of their productions out of samples, as well as the warm, mellow, and exuberant undertones apparent in their work. Pete Rock himself has added validation to the comparisons with J Dilla by stating "he's the only producer in this game that was just as serious [as me]."


== Discography ==

Studio albums

Soul Survivor (1998)
Soul Survivor II (2004)
NY's Finest (2008)
Soul Survivor 3 (TBA)Collaboration albums

Mecca and the Soul Brother (with CL Smooth) (1992)
The Main Ingredient (with CL Smooth) (1994)
My Own Worst Enemy (with Ed O.G.) (2004)
80 Blocks from Tiffany's (with Camp Lo) (2011)
Monumental (with Smif-N-Wessun) (2011)
80 Blocks from Tiffany's 2 (with Camp Lo) (2013, re-released in 2020)
Don't Smoke Rock (with Smoke DZA) (2016)
Retropolitan (with Skyzoo) (2019)
21 Grams: Worth It's Weight In Soul (with AMXXR) (2021)Collaboration EPs

All Souled Out (with CL Smooth) (1991)
The Basement Demos (with CL Smooth) (2009)
C (with Canibus) (2022)Instrumental albums

PeteStrumentals (2001)
The Surviving Elements: From Soul Survivor II Sessions (2005)
PeteStrumentals 2 (2015)
Lost Sessions (2017)
Return of the SP1200 (2019)
PeteStrumentals 3 (with the Soul Brothers) (2020)
PeteStrumentals 4 (2022)
Return of the SP1200 2 (2022)Compilation albums

Pete's Treats (1999)
Good Life: The Best of Pete Rock & CL Smooth (with CL Smooth) (2003)
Lost & Found: Hip Hop Underground Soul Classics (2003)


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Pete Rock discography at Discogs
Pete Rock at IMDb
Pete Rock's Tru Soul Record LabelMoses Barrett III (born July 22, 1973), known by the stage name Petey Pablo, is an American rapper from Greenville, North Carolina. He is best known for his 2003 crunk hit "Freek-a-Leek".


== Biography ==
Born in Greenville, North Carolina, Barrett spent five years in prison for a 1993 armed robbery and upon his release moved to New York City, where he met Black Rob and Busta Rhymes, and, according to rumor, was signed to Jive Records after the A&R director overheard him rapping in a club bathroom.


=== Musical career ===


==== 2001–2002: First album ====
After getting signed to Jive Records, Petey Pablo began working on his debut album. The first single "Raise Up" was released in summer 2001, which was produced by Timbaland. "Raise Up" was helped by rotation on MTV and heavy airplay on urban radio, and reached number 25 on the Billboard Hot 100. Pablo's first album Diary of a Sinner: 1st Entry peaked at number 13 on the Billboard 200 and was certified Gold by the RIAA.


==== 2003–2006: Second album, and hiatus ====
In early 2003, Diary of a Sinner: 1st Entry received a Grammy nomination for Best Rap Album. It lost the award to Eminem's The Eminem Show.Petey Pablo's success continued with the release of his second studio album, Still Writing in My Diary: 2nd Entry which he started working on in 2003. The album was a critical and commercial success, peaking at number 4 on the Billboard 200 and was certified Gold by the RIAA. The lead single off the album, "Freek-a-Leek", produced by Lil Jon became Petey Pablo's biggest hit single of his career by reaching number 7 on the Billboard Hot 100. Also in 2004, Petey Pablo achieved more mainstream success for his feature on Ciara's hit single "Goodies" which topped the Billboard Hot 100. 
After the release of his second studio album, Petey Pablo went on a hiatus from music.


==== 2010–present: Return to music and third studio album ====
After his departure from Jive Records, Petey Pablo founded his own independent label, Carolina Music Group. He released a track in July 2010 entitled "Go", which was produced by Timbaland. In September 2011, Petey Pablo released a single called "Get Low" on iTunes.


=== Arrest and incarceration ===
On September 11, 2010, Barrett was arrested at Raleigh-Durham International Airport after trying to carry a stolen 9mm semi-automatic pistol aboard a US Airways flight bound for Los Angeles. On September 26, 2011, he was sentenced to 35 months in prison, and entered incarceration at the Federal Correctional Institution (Beckley) on January 4, 2012. He was held at the Federal Correctional Institution (Fort Dix), with a release date of July 17, 2014, but he was released early on March 13, 2014.On February 17, 2012, Petey Pablo released a mixtape called Carolina #1 while in prison under the independent newly founded label "Carolina Music Group". Pablo had also confirmed working on his third studio album A&R: Anticipated Recordings, which has yet to have a confirmed release date.


=== Prison release and later music ===
In late 2015 Pablo released a new single titled "Never Imagined".
On Sunday, January 17, 2016, after the Carolina Panthers' victory over the Seattle Seahawks in the 2016 NFC Divisional playoffs, Pablo released a new single via Soundcloud and YouTube titled "Carolina Colors". The single was used as a hype song for the 2016 NFC Championship Game against the Arizona Cardinals.


=== Acting career ===
In 2002, Petey Pablo appeared as himself in the film Drumline where he performs "Club Banger", "You Can Find Me", "Raise Up", and "I Told Y'All". 
Petey Pablo had a guest appearance in "A Thousand Deaths", a 2005 episode of The Shield.  In 2009, Petey Pablo appeared in the film Just Another Day where he played B-Bone. In 2015, Petey Pablo played Clyde in the episode "Without a Country" on the show Empire, in which his character performed "Snitch Bitch" with Lucious Lyon (played by Terrence Howard) in jail.


== Discography ==
 
Studio albums2001: Diary of a Sinner: 1st Entry
2004: Still Writing in My Diary: 2nd Entry
2007: Proper Procedures
2018: Keep on Goin'Mixtapes2007: Same Eyez on Me
2008: Life on Death Row
2012: Carolina #1
2013: Enormous


== References ==


== External links ==
Petey Pablo entry at Allmusic
Petey Pablo video interview with Money Train & Thenkman on YouTubeThee Phantom (born Jeffrey M. McNeill; July 11, in Philadelphia) is an artist who specializes in combining Hip-Hop with live orchestration by recording and performing with classically trained musicians, including forming his own "Illharmonic Orchestra". He wrote his first rhyme at the age of 8 and made his first beat by mixing the instrumental from the Beastie Boys’ Paul Revere with Beethoven’s Fifth Symphony at age 12. Most notably, in 2002 Phantom became the first Hip-Hop artist to perform at Philadelphia’s prestigious Kimmel Center with musical accompaniment from members of the world-renowned Philadelphia Orchestra and Chamber Orchestra of Philadelphia. Phantom was invited back in 2003 to perform at the Kimmel Center’s annual Summer Solstice Celebration. Accompanied by a string quartet, concert pianist and a sitar player, he performed to a capacity crowd in the 650-seat Perelman Theater. In June 2006, Phantom graced the stage of the Kimmel Center’s 2,500-seat Verizon Hall with a string section, brass section, female vocalist, a DJ and a trio of breakdancers. In October 2006, Phantom made his television debut on Philadelphia's NBC 10 Show, performing with a string trio and a female vocalist named, "The Phoenix".
In 2003–2004, Phantom's independently released single entitled, “Storming the Bastille” b/w "A Million MC's", received airplay on over 300 college and independent radio stations in the U.S., topping the charts at WGBB and WSIA in New York among others. "Storming" has also reached the airwaves in Germany, Japan, Sweden, Italy, Spain, Croatia, the UK, Singapore, Australia, Ireland, Africa, and France.
In 2006, Phantom completed and released his debut album, entitled Thee Phantom's Hero Complex, on his independent label Invisible Man Productions. Thee Phantom nearly discontinued the album and his career after his best friend, Dr. Jason Porter, was murdered in Atlanta. However, after a year-long hiatus he was convinced to resume recording and to honor Jason's memory by dedicating the album to him.


== Musicians and vocalists ==
Musicians and vocalists that Thee Phantom has performed and/or recorded with include:

Gloria Justen - Violin/Arranger - Philadelphia Orchestra, Chamber Orchestra of Philadelphia - Website
Andrea Coln "The Phoenix" - Vocalist
James Hill - Vocalist
Verso - MC - Myspace Page
Veronica Jurkiewicz - Viola
Joanne Yun - Cello
Jack Drummond Jr - String Specialist - Myspace Site
Monica McIntyre - Cello - Website
Owen "Fiidla" Brown - String Specialist - Website
DJ Kingspin - DJ - MystiQuintet - Myspace Site
Kenneth Bean - Trumpet - Myspace Site
Chuck Treece - Drummer/Musician - Myspace Site
Daniel DeJesus - Violin, Cello
Mike Ireland - Viola
Reef the Lost Cauze - MC
Side Effect - MC - Myspace Site
Verbal Tec - MC - Myspace Site
Robert Randolph - Trumpet
Jamal Jones - Trumpet
Richard Magill - Trumpet
Mei-Chen Liao Barnes - Violin - Chamber Orchestra of Philadelphia
Elizabeth Kaderabek - Violin - Chamber Orchestra of Philadelphia
James Cooper - Cello - Chamber Orchestra of Philadelphia
Renard Edwards - Viola - Philadelphia Orchestra (first African-American musician to play for the Philadelphia Orchestra)
Adam Lesnick - Brass/Arranger
Angela Cage - Violin - [1]
Vicki Scotto - Violin
Jeremy Lambert - Viola
Andy Borkowski - Cello
Andrew Siddons - Trombone
Ben Morgan - Sitar
Antonio Stewart - Viola
Yoomi Kwon - Cello
Laura Scalzo - Violin
Matthew D. Morrison - Violin Website
Christopher Wojahn - Violin  [2]


== External links ==
Phantom's website: http://www.theephantomhiphop.com
Japan Times Feature - http://www.japantimes.co.jp/culture/2011/06/02/music/thee-phantoms-genre-blending-screams-rap-me-amadeus/
Metropolis Magazine Feature in Tokyo http://metropolisjapan.com/thee-phantom-illharmonic-orchestra/
The Key WXPN Article - http://thekey.xpn.org/2017/04/11/bartok-breakbeats-philly-son-thee-phantom-bridging-hip-hop-classical/
Cincinnati City Beat Article - http://citybeat.com/cincinnati/article-28164-music_friday_flow_with_thee_phantom.html
SoulCiti Article in Austin - http://soulciti.com/theephantom/
Philly Weekly Article - http://www.philadelphiaweekly.com/music/north-philly-s-rhyme-conductor-thee-phantom-returns-home/article_b9f48286-076b-11e8-bf2b-271b92c9f4c1.htmlMalik Izaak Taylor (November 20, 1970 – March 22, 2016), known professionally as Phife Dawg (or simply Phife), was an American rapper and a member of the group A Tribe Called Quest with Q-Tip and Ali Shaheed Muhammad (and for a short time Jarobi White). He was also known as the "Five-Foot Assassin" and "the Five-Footer", because he stood at 5 feet 3 inches (1.60 m).


== Early life ==
Phife Dawg was born Malik Izaak Taylor on November 20, 1970, in Queens, New York City, the son of Trinidadian immigrant parents Cheryl Boyce-Taylor, a poet, and Walt Taylor. Born prematurely, his twin brother Mikal died shortly after birth. His mother settled in the St. Albans neighborhood of Queens, where Phife Dawg was raised, when she was 13 years old. He was a cousin of writer Zinzi Clemmons.He first met his friend Q-Tip at the age of two, and at nine years old, Phife Dawg suggested that they should rap, after hearing "Rapper's Delight" by the Sugarhill Gang for the first time. He attended Pine Forge Academy, a Seventh-day Adventist boarding school near Philadelphia, for his freshman year of high school, later transferring to Springfield Gardens High School in Queens.


== Career ==
Phife Dawg formed A Tribe Called Quest, then simply named Quest, with Q-Tip and DJ Ali Shaheed Muhammad in 1985; the group was later expanded with the addition of Jarobi White. A Tribe Called Quest were closely associated with fellow hip-hop acts De La Soul and Jungle Brothers, with the groups collectively known as the Native Tongues. A Tribe Called Quest was initially offered a demo deal by Geffen Records in 1989, but signed to Jive Records to release its 1990 début People's Instinctive Travels and the Paths of Rhythm.Phife Dawg's contributions to the group increased on its second album, 1991's The Low End Theory, which saw Phife—often calling himself "the Five-Foot Assassin"—rapping about social and political issues; the record has since been acclaimed by critics and musicians. The group released three more albums that decade—Midnight Marauders in 1993, Beats, Rhymes and Life in 1996, and The Love Movement in 1998—before disbanding as a result of conflict both with their record label and internally. The group's troubles, especially the sometimes tense relationship between Phife and Q-Tip, were featured in the 2011 documentary Beats, Rhymes & Life: The Travels of A Tribe Called Quest, directed by Michael Rapaport.Phife also performed with other artists. He was featured on the Fu-Schnickens song "La Schmoove", Diamond D's "Painz & Strife" with Pete Rock, and Chi-Ali's "Let the Horns Blow" with Dres, Al' Tariq and Trugoy. In 2000, he released his debut solo album, Ventilation: Da LP. In 2013, it was reported that Phife was working on another solo album, MUTTYmorPHosis. A single, "Sole Men", was released one day after Phife's death (March 23, 2016) along with a posthumously released video. Another single, "Nutshell", was released online in April 2016 along with a posthumously released video.On November 13, 2015, A Tribe Called Quest reunited for a performance on The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon in commemoration of the 25th anniversary of People's Instinctive Travels and the Paths of Rhythm. That night, Phife and Q-Tip decided to put aside their differences and record a new group album, We Got It from Here... Thank You 4 Your Service, in secrecy. Phife spent four months working on the album before his death; it was completed by the surviving members and released on November 11, 2016. In February 2017, it was announced that Phife's second studio album would be released later in the year. The single "Wanna Dance" was released that month and features Dwele and Mike City.Phife Dawg's second solo album, Forever, was released on March 22, 2022, the sixth anniversary of his death.


== Personal life ==
Taylor was married to Deisha Head-Taylor and had two children, a daughter and a son. He was a fan of the New York Knicks, and was a playable character in the video games NBA 2K7 and NBA 2K9.


=== Health problems and death ===
Taylor was diagnosed with diabetes in 1990. Conflicting reports indicated it as type 1, while other sources reported it as type 2. He described himself as a "funky diabetic" in the single "Oh My God" from A Tribe Called Quest's 1993 album Midnight Marauders. After the group disbanded, he continued playing live shows to help cover medical costs, and revealed in the 2011 documentary film Beats, Rhymes & Life that he was "just addicted to sugar ... it's really a sickness". In 2008, Taylor developed renal failure and received a kidney transplant from his wife, but it was unsuccessful, and by 2012 he again required a transplant.On March 22, 2016, Taylor died at age 45 in his Oakley, California, home due to complications of diabetes.


== Legacy ==
Phife has been described as having had a "self-deprecating swagger", and his work with A Tribe Called Quest helped challenge the "macho posturing" of rap and hip-hop music during the late 1980s and early 1990s. Phife's work has been cited as an influence on Kanye West, Jill Scott, The Roots and Common, while the 1991 album The Low End Theory is considered one of the greatest hip-hop albums ever.On November 19, 2016, a portion of Linden Boulevard, at the intersection of 192nd Street in St. Albans, was honorarily renamed "Malik 'Phife Dawg' Taylor Way". The location is significant as the site of the video for A Tribe Called Quest's song "Check the Rhime".


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===
Ventilation: Da LP (2000)
Forever (2022)


=== Guest appearances ===


== Filmography ==
1993: Who's the Man? – Gerald
1998: The Rugrats Movie – Newborn Baby
2007: NBA 2K8 – Himself
2011: Beats, Rhymes & Life: The Travels of A Tribe Called Quest – Himself
2017: NBA 2K18 - Himself


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Coleman, Brian (2007). Check the Technique. Random House. ISBN 978-0-8129-7775-2.


== External links ==

Phife Dawg discography at Discogs 
Phife Dawg at IMDb
Official A Tribe Called Quest websiteStelios Phili is a Cypriot-American songwriter, record producer, and composer based in New York, New York. He has produced tracks featuring artists such as A$AP Ferg, Young Thug, Lolo Zouai, SZA, MIA, and Big Sean.


== Songwriting and production ==
According to an interview with MTV, Stelios Phili met rapper A$AP Ferg while working at GQ in 2013. The two began collaborating after fellow A$AP Mob member A$AP Nast passed along one of the producer's beats, which would later become the A$AP Ferg song "Ja-Rule" featuring Big Sean. In 2014, Phili produced the first single from A$AP Ferg's mixtape, Ferg Forever. The song, "Doe-Active", was met with positive reviews. Pitchfork Media described the song as "a minimalist beat that could've slid right into Yeezus", Stereogum called it "a total nutso banger", and Complex named it a "certified banger, with club-destroying drums". Phili's production was featured on four additional tracks on Ferg Forever.
In 2015, Phili produced DonMonique's debut EP, Thirst Trap. The New York Times described it as "full of transfixing slo-mo production by Stelios Phili somewhere between modern-day Internet-rap sparseness and the hard, murky slap of mid-1990s New York street rap."In 2017, Phili began collaborating with New York-based artist Lolo Zouaï. Their first collaboration, "High Highs to Low Lows", topped Spotify's Fresh Finds Best of 2017 list. Since then, he has co-written and produced Zouaï's two albums on RCA Records, 2019's High Highs to Low Lows and 2022's Playgirl.In 2018, Phili produced the Young Thug and Elton John collaboration "High". According to Rolling Stone, the song came together after Phili read an interview with Elton John, who expressed his admiration for Young Thug. After Phili built a new beat around an edited version of the "Rocket Man" a cappella, 300 Entertainment A&R Geoff Ogunlesi played the song to Young Thug. On September 24, 2018, "High" was released on his EP On the Rvn. The song was awarded Best New Music by Pitchfork Media, with The Fader describing the song's reception as "swift and rapturous" and "a return to iconoclastic form for Young Thug."


== Soundtracks and scores ==


=== Fashion ===
In 2013, Stelios Phili composed the runway music for En Noir's Spring/Summer 2014 show. In early 2014, he composed the music for designer Mark McNairy's Fall/Winter 2014 show.In 2018, Phili founded of the sound design studio SCÈNES. Through his studio, Phili has scored campaigns for Yves Saint Laurent, Nars, Calvin Klein, Nike, Vogue, Adidas, Tom Ford, Estée Lauder, and Louis Vuitton. In 2020, he remixed Lady Gaga’s “Sine from Above” for Valentino’s Voce Viva campaign, directed by Harmony Korine. In 2022, Phili produced a remix of Queen’s “A Kind of Magic” for a global Coca-Cola campaign that launched Coke Studio.In 2022, Phili composed the music for designer Kim Shui's Spring/Sumer 2023 runway show.


=== Film and TV ===
Phili’s music has been featured in TV shows such as Euphoria, Insecure, and The Afterparty. For Apple TV’s The Afterparty (2022), he composed an EP for the fictional rapper, Xavier, played by Dave Franco.  He has also contributed music to the award-winning films Lowland Kids (2019) and The Fallout (2021).


== Musical style ==
Phili's production style is described as fresh and understated. According to Pigeons & Planes, "Stelios Phili is one of those producers you can recognize from the jump—he utilizes a unique collection of sounds that is both muted and aggressive: murky synths and pillowy cymbal taps are cut by a fierce snare, or a saxophone seamlessly transforms into an electric guitar. It's all about subtlety with SP, and he's got it down to a science."


== Discography ==


=== Production and writing credits ===
A$AP Ferg – "Doe-Active" (2014)
A$AP Ferg (featuring Big Sean) – "Ja Rule" (2014)
A$AP Ferg (featuring SZA) – "Real Thing" (2014)
A$AP Ferg – "Dope Walk" (2014)
A$AP Ferg (featuring MIA and Crystal Caines) – "Reloaded (Let it Go pt. 2)" (Co-prod. Crystal Caines, The Understudy) (2014)
Donmonique (featuring Remy Banks and Wara from the NBHD) – "UNTLD" (2015)
Donmonique – "Drown" (2015)
Donmonique (featuring Noah Caine) – "Fifty Kay" (2015)
Donmonique – "ION" (2015)
Donmonique (featuring Danny Brown and Slayter) – "Tha Low" (2015)
Donmonique – "Jada" (2015)
Dev09 – "You Made Me" (2015)
Kloe – "Teenage Craze" (2016)
A$AP Ferg (featuring Missy Elliott) – "Strive" (2016)
Lolo Zouaï – "High Highs to Low Lows" (2017)
Lolo Zouaï – "Blue" (2018)
Lolo Zouaï – "Brooklyn Love" (2018)
Lolo Zouaï – "Desert Rose" (2018)
Lolo Zouaï – "Challenge" (2018)
Lolo Zouaï – "For the Crowd" (2018)
Young Thug (featuring Elton John) - "High" (2018)
Kiiara - "1%" (2018)
Cameron Dallas - "Why Haven't I Met You" (2018)
Lolo Zouaï – "Moi" (2019)
Lolo Zouaï – "Chevy Impala" (2019)
Lolo Zouaï – "Caffeine" (2019)
Lolo Zouaï – "Ride" (2019)
Lolo Zouaï – "Here to Stay" (2019)
Lolo Zouaï – "Look At Us" (2019)
Lolo Zouaï – "Summers in Vegas" (2019)
Lolo Zouaï – "Out the Bottle" (2019)
Lolo Zouaï – "Beaucoup" (2019)
Lolo Zouaï – "Chain" (2019)
Lolo Zouaï – "Money Diamonds Roses" (2019)
Lolo Zouaï, E-40 – "Chevy Impala (feat. E-40)" (2019)
Lolo Zouai – "Alone With You" (2020)
Lolo Zouai – "Galipette" (2021)
Lolo Zouai – "Scooter" (2021)


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website 
steliosphili on SoundCloudJamal Phillips (born April 26, 1979), known professionally mononymously as Jamal and formerly as Mally G, is an American rapper and record producer. He started his career as one-half of rap duo Illegal, the rap act formed by Dallas Austin in the early 1990s.


== Career ==


=== Illegal and going solo ===
Phillips' tenure with Illegal was short-lived; following the lukewarm response to 1993's The Untold Truth — the group's full-length debut — Phillips embarked on a solo career. He teamed up with Erick Sermon of the Def Squad to release 1995's Last Chance, No Breaks, his debut release.
The album (produced by Easy Mo Bee, Redman, Rockwilder and Sermon) peaked at #10 and #37 on Billboard magazine's Heatseekers and Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums charts respectively. The album also spawned a pair of hit singles — "Fades Em All", which sampled The Notorious B.I.G.'s "Ready to Die", and "Keep It Real", which sampled Stevie Wonder's "Ribbon in the Sky".


=== Smoke-a-Lot Records ===
In 2006, Jamal signed a deal with rapper Yukmouth to be a part of his Smoke-a-Lot Records label.


=== Other collaborations ===
In 1995 he performed on Conspiracy, the LP from Junior M.A.F.I.A. He has since gone on to collaborate with other renowned rappers; in 1996, he was featured on The Coming the LP from Busta Rhymes and Keith Murray's Enigma. The following year, he teamed up again with Busta Rhymes, performing on that rapper's 1997 LP, When Disaster Strikes. In 1998, he collaborated with the Def Squad on El Niño, their debut release.
He also had production duties on B.Coming, the 2005 release from Beanie Sigel.
Jamal appears on Illegal bandmate Malik's recent (2005) CD "Malik M.D. aka Hershey Locc Hefner: The Game Needs Me".
He has also appeared on songs with Shyheim, Heltah Skeltah, Coolio, MC Breed, Method Man, Busta Rhymes, Young Zee, Bone Thugs N Harmony, Treach, The D.O.C. and others.
Jamal also appears on Skullz' 2018 single "Everybody Can Get It" feat. Juxx Diamondz.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===


=== Collaborative albums ===


=== Singles ===


== References ==


== External links ==
Jamal at AllMusic
Mally G entry at Discogs under the Mally G moniker
Jamal entry at Discogs under the Jamal moniker
[1] Malik M.D's CD featuring Jamal at CD Baby
[2] under the Mally G monikerKashaun Rameek Rutling (born May 16, 1989), known professionally as Phresher (stylized as PHresher), is an American rapper from Brooklyn, New York. Phresher first gained recognition in 2016 for his single "Wait a Minute" featuring Remy Ma, and found continued success with his single "Right Now" featuring Cardi B in 2017. In late 2017, he was featured on Eminem's song "Chloraseptic" from his ninth studio album Revival, which debuted at number one on the US Billboard 200. In 2018, he was featured on an official remix of "Chloraseptic" alongside Eminem and 2 Chainz.


== Early life ==
Rutling was born in Brooklyn, New York, and is of Trinidadian descent. Growing up in the Bamaz Projects, a heavily crime-ridden area in East New York, Brooklyn, he was an only child raised by both his parents. He was an athlete in high school as a teenager, and attended Thomas Jefferson High School, graduating in 2004. He was a member of the football team and played safety and wide receiver in Division II. His first son was born when he was sixteen years old, forcing him to quit sports to focus on raising his son. It was not until his father sent him a hip hop beat that he began to explore his rapping skills. He decided to pursue a life in music when he was 21. At the beginning of his career, he wrote over 100 songs which were never released, but drastically helped him improve his writing and delivery.


== Career ==


=== Early career ===
Rutling was a paraprofessional in New York City public schools for 10 years before he decided to pursue a musical career. During his time as a paraeducator, Rutling worked with special education students and often worked in youth detention centers. At the time, he made music on the side as a novice; however, it wasn't until he realized his potential talent that he decided to focus on music full-time. In addition to making music, Rutling also owns a clothing line named "SO BarKlay Apparel."


=== Musical career ===
Phresher released his debut song, "Polo Song", in 2010. Around 2012, Phresher started to release singles, EPs, and music videos onto the internet, which saw minor success. He released his debut mixtape, Take It Personal, in 2015. In 2016, his single "Wait a Minute" was pitched to the YouTube global music team by The Young 'N Grateful Group, becoming an instant success. Following "Wait a Minute" receiving several million views, the video caught the attention of rapper 50 Cent, who later appeared on a remix of the song along with rapper Remy Ma. The song appeared as a bonus cut on the DJ Whoo Kid mixtape Lost Flash Drive and released on G-Unit Records. Rapper Royce da 5'9" also put forth a freestyle remix over "Wait a Minute." Following Royce promoting the remix via social media, Eminem made a notable mention of the freestyle. Eminem's heavy revere as to Royce's word play ultimately led the Detroit rapper to become interested in Phresher.In 2017, Phresher's management duo Jay Andino and Michael Caseau had become sought after by Shady Records staff; initially, to aid in production for the upcoming Revival album. After several hundred instrumentals were sent by the Young 'N Grateful collective to no avail, Caseau suggested to Shady Records A&R's, stating:

"Phresher collaborating with Em' could give that same platform and vibe Royce gave on the remix. Instead of using a similar beat, we just need any beat with him on it to recreate the energy, not the sound design.”Thereafter, Caseau worked closely with Shady Records' A&Rs. In 2017, Eminem's long-time manager Paul Rosenberg contacted Andino, stating Eminem had interest in collaborating with Phresher. Eminem's mix engineer flew to New York to meet with Phresher to record "Chloraseptic," listed as track No. 3 on Revival. Phresher spoke about the collaboration, stating:

"When I first heard that he wanted me on the project, I was astonished. I didn't believe anything until they actually flew in and recorded the record. That's when I was like, 'Oh! This is real.' It was about two months ago, three the most. That was just amazing, man. We met in the studio. That was just crazy."On April 5, 2018, Phresher released the song "Teamwork" as the lead single from his debut studio album, PH (2018). The song's music video was released four days later on April 9. The second single from the album, "You Do", was released on May 11, 2018. The music video for "You Do" was released on May 23, 2018. On June 3, 2018, Phresher was brought out to perform "Chloraseptic (Remix)" alongside Eminem on the third day of the Governors Ball Music Festival in Randall's Island, New York City.After multiple delays, PH was released on June 15, 2018. The album contains sixteen tracks and features guest appearances by Busta Rhymes, Joey Badass, and Cardi B, among others.From December 2019 to March 2020, Phresher starred as a cast member on VH1's reality series Love & Hip Hop: New York.On July 10, 2020, Phresher released his second extended play, Brick by Brick. It features guest appearances by Stunna 4 Vegas, A Boogie wit da Hoodie, Fivio Foreign, and Casanova, among others.


== Artistry ==


=== Influences ===
In an interview, Phresher stated that his influences include Eminem, Jay-Z, Lil Wayne, Drake, and The Notorious B.I.G.


=== Musical style ===
Phresher is known for his versatile sound; when asked by XXL about his music style, he noted that "it's all over the place. People say I sound like I'm from the South, some say I sound like I'm from California."


== Personal life ==
Phresher has two children, a son and a daughter with Jennifer Coreano. In his spare time, he coaches basketball and football.


=== 2020 assault and robbery ===
On November 20, 2020, Phresher was the target of a robbery and attempted kidnapping. According to a post he made on Instagram, he was robbed at gunpoint, pistol-whipped, and nearly kidnapped by a group of individuals. Among the items stolen from him were his car, his cash, and his jewelry. On November 26, he shared a post on Instagram to express his gratitude after surviving the attack and confirmed that he was recovering well.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===


=== Extended plays ===


=== Singles ===
"My Circle" (2016)
"On the Low" (feat. Desiigner) (2016)
"Danny Devito" (feat. Desiigner & Rowdy Rebel) (2016)
"Wait a Minute" (2016)
"Fakin' Moves" (with ScoHoolie) (2016)
"Wait a Minute (Remix)" (feat. Remy Ma) (2016)
"Lyft (Fuck a Uber)" (2017)
"Feel a Way" (feat. Jim Jones, Don Q & Papoose) (2017)
"Whole Thang" (2017)
"Radio" (2017)
"Cookin'" (2017)
"Right Now" (feat. Cardi B) (2017)
"Teamwork" (feat. Philthy Rich & Derez Deshon) (2018)
"Like Dis" (2018)
"You Do" (2018)
"Keep It Up (Remix)" (feat. Famous Dex) (2018)
"Papi Chulo" (2018)
"All the Smoke" (2019)
"Birthday Drip" (with DJ Prymetyme and Klassic) (2019)
"Duck Sauce (Remix)" (with Saint Vinci and DaBaby) (2019)
"Bout Time" (2020)
"Gawd Damn" (2020)
"Nasty Work" (2020)
"Mamba Sauce" (2020)
"Point Em Out" (feat. A Boogie wit da Hoodie) (2020)
"Big Dawg" (with Casanova) (2020)
"Mood" (2020)
"Set the Tone" (feat. Kocky Ka and Benny the Butcher) (2020)
"Still Got Da Juice" (2021)
"Whistle Flow" (2021)


=== Guest appearances ===
"Add It Up" – Mone Yukka (feat. OG Maco, Phresher & Ash Riser) (2016)
"Doing Well" – Ghetto God (feat. Phresher, Casanova & Lola Brooke) (2017)
"All I Know" – Hoodrich V (feat. Phresher) (2017)
"Play Dumb" – Big Bz (feat. Phresher) (2017)
"Chloraseptic" – Eminem (feat. Phresher) (2017)
"Upset" – Fatboy SSE (feat. Phresher & Lar$$en) (2017)
"Vibes" – Shae Brock (feat. Phresher) (2018)
"Chloraseptic (Remix)" – Eminem (feat. 2 Chainz & Phresher) (2018)
"Groomed By the Block" – Stevie Stone & JL (feat. Phresher) (2018)
"Bae a Nigga" – Rush Reid (feat. Phresher) (2018)
"Ambition" – Homeyhill (feat. Phresher) (2019)
"Who Want It!?" – Jaquae (feat. Phresher & Manolo Rose) (2019)
"What You Need" – Scoob da Dawg (feat. Phresher & Jerome Milly) (2019)
"Err Body (Remix)" – Scotty Malone (feat. Phresher) (2020)
"Can't Tell" – ReLoaded Rose and Raj Beats (feat. Phresher) (2020)
"Back Against the Wall" – Majesty (feat. Phresher) (2020)
"Jumping Jack" – Knew Felony (feat. Phresher) (2020)
"Sports Car" – Wolf and Coby Persin (feat. Phresher & EibiOne) (2021)


== Filmography ==


== References ==Prakazrel Samuel Michel (born October 19, 1972), known professionally as Pras (), is an American rapper. He is best known as a member of the hip hop group Fugees, alongside Wyclef Jean and Lauryn Hill. After the Fugees, he earned two Top 40 hits on the Billboard Hot 100, the Grammy-nominated song "Ghetto Supastar (That Is What You Are)" featuring Ol' Dirty Bastard and Mýa from the film Bulworth, and "Avenues" with Refugee Camp All-Stars and Ky-Mani Marley. He also collaborated with Jean and rock band Queen on the 1998 remix of "Another One Bites the Dust", which reached the top five on the UK Singles Chart. In 2017, he won a Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Digital Daytime Drama Series, as a producer on the web series The Bay.
In 2019, he began to face legal issues when he was charged with criminal conspiracy for allegedly illegally donating to the Barack Obama 2012 presidential campaign and lobbying the Trump administration to deter investigations into the 1MDB scandal involving fugitive Malaysian  businessman Jho Low. On April 26, 2023, Pras was found guilty of 10 criminal counts in the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia.


== Early life ==
Michel was born in Brooklyn, New York City, and raised in Irvington, New Jersey. He is Haitian-American. Pras cultivated an early interest in music. When he was 15, he met Lauryn Hill while both attended Columbia High School in Maplewood, New Jersey. In 1988, Pras introduced Hill to Wyclef Jean. Pras, Jean, and Hill began to rehearse under the guidance of Kool and the Gang's producer, Ronald Khalis Bell, and subsequently they formed a musical group called The Rap Translators in 1989 (also known as Tranzlator Crew).


== Career ==


=== Music ===
In 1994, The Fugees recorded their first album Blunted on Reality, under the supervision of Ronald Khalis Bell. Before and during this, Pras attended Rutgers University and Yale University, pursuing a double major in Philosophy and Psychology. In 1996, The Fugees achieved historic crossover success with The Score, which went multi-platinum.
Pras has also forged a successful solo career, beginning with an international hit single from his first full-length solo LP, "Ghetto Supastar (That Is What You Are)", featuring Mýa and Ol' Dirty Bastard. "Ghetto Superstar" became a top ten single in 1999, and the eighth most played single. The song earned Pras a performance at the World Music Awards. The hit single was included in the soundtrack for the film Bulworth. "Ghetto Supastar" spent eight weeks in the UK Top 5, peaking at No. 2 in July 1998, and reached US No. 15 a month later. "Blue Angels", from the same album, was a UK Top 10 hit, reaching No. 6 in November.Pras also featured on the track "Turn You On" by Swedish artist DeDe which was released in 2007. "Turn You On" was also written and produced by Pras. After nine weeks on Sweden's single chart, it peaked at No. 2. He also featured "Pushin'" from the album Equalize by Swami, which was released in 2007.


=== Film ===
After his cameo debut in the 1999 feature film Mystery Men, Pras gained an interest in Hollywood. In 2000, Pras starred in the New Line film, Turn It Up. In early 2002, he appeared in the Sony and Urban World release Higher Ed, and Go for Broke in which he starred and produced. He also co-starred in three 20th Century Fox films in 2007. These included The Mutant Chronicles.
In 2006, Pras created Skid Row, Los Angeles, a documentary account of his nine-day experience posing as a homeless person living in downtown Los Angeles. Using a hidden camera, Pras captured the reality of homelessness. The film was produced by Teryn Fogel. Skid Row was released on August 24, 2007.In 2009, Pras travelled to Somalia to film the documentary Paper Dreams which examines piracy off the African coast. During filming, pirates invaded the ship he was on, the MV Maersk Alabama, and took the captain of the ship hostage. Due to be released in 2014, the documentary remains unfinished due to a legal dispute.In 2015, Pras completed a documentary, Sweet Micky For President, which chronicles the rise of Haitian musician Michel Martelly, through his election to fight corruption as President of Haiti, an election campaign that was strongly endorsed by Pras. The film had its world premiere at the 2015 Slamdance Film Festival.In 2017, he won a Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Digital Daytime Drama Series as a producer on the web series The Bay.


== Political activism ==
In 2013, Michel became a "top initial donor" to Organizing for Action, a political advocacy group formed by Obama associates in January 2013.


== Legal problems ==

The United States Department of Justice (DOJ) indicted Pras on May 10, 2019, for his part in an alleged criminal conspiracy with Malaysian financier Jho Low. The DOJ alleged that between June 2012 and November 2012, Michel aided in the illegal transfer of approximately $865,000 from foreign entities into the Barack Obama 2012 presidential campaign. The DOJ alleged that these funds were disguised as purportedly legitimate contributions, but were stolen from the Malaysian sovereign wealth fund 1Malaysia Development Berhad (1MDB). Ultimately, the DOJ alleged that $21 million in foreign campaign contributions were funneled into the 2012 US presidential election to benefit "Candidate A".  The Washington Post and The New York Times identified "Candidate A" as Barack Obama.In June 2021, Pras was charged by a federal grand jury for running a back-channel campaign to get the Trump administration to drop an investigation of Jho Low and the 1MDB investment company.He was also accused of advocating for the extradition of a Chinese dissident, Guo Wengui, from the United States. In the plea documents of former DOJ employee George Higginbotham, Pras was accused of paying Republican fundraiser Elliott Broidy and others to have Guo extradited to China. Though unnamed in the filings, Pras is "easily identified" due to linked cases and confirmation from sources close to the case. Pras "vehemently and unequivocally" denied accusations related to Higginbotham's case.As of 2021, due to the charges against him, Pras cannot travel internationally. In January 2022, Fugees cancelled their planned international reunion tour, citing the COVID-19 pandemic.On April 26, 2023, Pras was found guilty of 10 criminal counts in the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia.


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===


=== EPs ===


=== Singles ===


==== As lead artist ====


==== As featured artist ====


== Acting and producing career ==
Mystery Men (1999) – Tony C (credited as Prakazrel Michel)
Turn It Up (2000) – Denzel/Diamond (credited as Pras Michel) (co-producer)
Da Hip Hop Witch (2000) - Himself
Higher Ed (2001) – Ed Green (credited as Pras Michel) (executive producer)
Go for Broke (2002) – Jackson/Jackie (credited as Pras Michel) (producer)
Nora's Hair Salon (2004)
Careful What You Wish For (2004) – Zen Salesman (credited as Pras Michel)
Feel the Noise (2007) – Electric
First Night (2007) – himself (producer)
Skid Row (2007) – himself (producer)
Mutant Chronicles (2007) – Captain Michaels (producer)
Paper Dreams (2010) – himself (producer)
Sweet Mickey for President (2015) – himself (producer)


== References ==


== External links ==
MTV artist page
Pras at IMDbChristopher Edward Martin (born March 21, 1966), known professionally as DJ Premier (also known as Preemo), is an American record producer and DJ. He is considered one of the greatest hip hop producers of all time. He was half of the hip hop duo Gang Starr—alongside the rapper Guru—and presently forms half of the hip hop duo PRhyme, together with Royce da 5'9".


== Early life ==
Christopher Edward Martin was born in the Fifth Ward of Houston, Texas on March 21, 1966. He was then raised in Prairie View, Texas, before moving to Brooklyn, New York, during his teenage years. He attended Prairie View A&M University, where he honed his musical skills as the campus DJ, and he also occasionally performed with the Marching Storm band.


== Musical career ==
Premier is known for producing all of Gang Starr's songs as well as many of those composed by the Gang Starr Foundation. Notable artists he has worked with include Afu-Ra, Anderson .Paak, AZ, Big Daddy Kane, Big L, Big Shug, Blaq Poet, Bun B, Canibus, Christina Aguilera, Common, Cormega, D'Angelo, Dilated Peoples, D.I.T.C., Doug E. Fresh, Dr. Dre, Fat Joe, Freddie Foxxx, The Game, Group Home, Ill Bill, J. Cole, Jeru the Damaja, Janet Jackson, Jay-Z, Joey Bada$$, Kanye West, KRS-One, The Lady of Rage, Limp Bizkit, Lord Finesse, The LOX, Ludacris, Mac Miller, Mobb Deep, M.O.P., Mos Def, Eminem, Nas, The Notorious B.I.G., O.C., Papoose, Rakim, Ras Kass, Reks, Royce da 5'9", Showbiz & A.G., Smif-N-Wessun, Snoop Dogg, Xzibit, Logic, Apathy, Celph Titled, Method Man and more.Premier collaborated with MC Jeru the Damaja on the album The Sun Rises in the East, released in 1994, as well as the 1996 follow-up, Wrath of the Math. Premier produced and supervised Livin' Proof by Group Home, also from the Gang Starr Foundation; although overlooked at the time of its 1995 release, the album eventually received acclaim. He produced several tracks on fellow Gang Starr Foundation member Afu-Ra's debut album Body of the Life Force and KRS-One's debut solo album Return of the Boom Bap.In 2006, pop/R&B singer Christina Aguilera recruited Premier to produce her album Back to Basics. Premier explained the reservations he heard from people regarding the collaboration:

When Christina [Aguilera] had me work with her, people were like, "Oh no. Please don't." Then, when they heard "Ain't No Other Man," "Back In The Day," and all the other records were still constructed like Premier tracks they were like, "Yo, I really love this album. I was really impressed. I was worried, but you totally sound like what we love about you." Until you hear it, don't say a word. I never want to be just attached to hip hop. I want to be attached to music—country, rap, soul, jazz, blues, it doesn't matter, gospel music—I come from all of that.

In 2008, Premier appeared in Grand Theft Auto IV as himself – the host for radio station The Classics 104.1.
Premier produced the majority of Blaq Poet's Tha Blaqprint, which was released in mid-2009.  Premier contributed a song on Game's 2011 album, The R.E.D. Album. Also in 2011, Premier appeared on the song "Gangster", on Bushido's album Jenseits von Gut und Böse.Premier was one of the artists followed in the 2012 documentary, Re:GENERATION. The film followed his production of the song "Regeneration," for which he used a live performance of his work by the Berklee Symphony Orchestra.In September 2012, Immortal Technique said that a song called "Born in the Trap," on his upcoming album, titled The Middle Passage, would feature production by Premier.In early 2014, Premier revealed that he was working with Aguilera again in an interview with New Zealand's Rip It Up magazine. Premier produced Y'all Ready Know by Slaughterhouse, from the Shady Records album, Shady XV, and the music video was published in November 2014.In mid-2014, Premier collaborated with Korean hip-hop group Dynamic Duo on two singles "AEAO" and "Animal", which were both warmly received.A mid-January 2015 announcement from Premier stated that the producer's studio, D&D, also known as "The HeadQcouterz," will cease to be operational. As part of the announcement, Premier confirmed that he was working on the album, Last Session @320, after he relocated to a recording space in Astoria, New York City, U.S. As of 2023, the album remains unreleased.
DJ Premier hosted a weekly two-hour show, Live From HeadQCourterz, on Sirius Satellite Radio's Shade 45. The show ended in 2022.DJ Premier served as one of the three curators for the soundtrack to the video game NBA 2K16, alongside DJ Khaled and DJ Mustard.


== Collaborations ==
The early line-up of the Gang Starr Foundation in the mid-1990s included Jeru the Damaja, Group Home, Big Shug, and Gang Starr. Premier was fully responsible for the production of Jeru the Damaja's first two albums, The Sun Rises in the East and Wrath of the Math. Jeru released three subsequent albums that did not include Premier's involvement. In terms of his Group Home collaboration, Premier commented in a 2003 interview: "They [Group Home] don't respect what fed them." He further explained that he only agreed to produce the track "The Legacy" because of Guru's involvement.Other artists closely tied to the Gang Starr Foundation who Premier collaborated with include: Afu Ra, Bahamadia, Krumbsnatcha, Big Shug, Smiley the Ghetto Child, and NYGz.Afu Ra explained Premier's influence in a September 2014 interview with the "Lyrically Fit" website:

Premier definitely coached me when I was in the booth. "harder..stronger..more this..more that"—I was an untamed artist and rapping next to recording your vocals are different. He gave me this knowledge through the work we did.

Besides the Gang Starr Foundation, Premier is closely affiliated with M.O.P., which he names as one of his all-time favorite groups. The relationship started with the remix of "Rugged, Neva Smoove" in 1994, a single from the group's first album, which also included the exclusive B-side "Downtown Swinga." From then, Premier produced about one-third of the songs on each subsequent album and overseeing and mixing the projects. On M.O.P.'s 2009 Foundation album, Premier provided only one track, which was called "What I Wanna B."
On May 16, 2019, DJ Premier released a collaboration with Buffalo (New York) rappers Conway The Machine, Westside Gunn, and Benny the Butcher, called "Headlines."
In June 2020, DJ Premier produced a track for Public Enemy called "State of the Union (STFU)".In August 2023, DJ Premier's collaboration clothing collection with AMIRI was released, marked with "PREEMO" alongside the Amiri typography, with a record print.


== Style and influences ==
DJ Premier's style of production epitomizes the New York sound of his earlier peers. He is known for sampling jazz, funk, and soul artists, as well as sampling an artist's past work when creating a new track for that same artist. For example, on Jay-Z's "So Ghetto", from the 1999 album Vol. 3... Life and Times of S. Carter, Premier samples an older Jay-Z song, 1997's "Who You Wit II". In addition, his encyclopedic memory of hip-hop lyrics allows him to distinctively speak with his hands by scratching in lyrics from several different songs to construct new phrases. Premier's beats are known for his oft-imitated combinations of short vocal samples, often from multiple artists, to create a chorus. Premier has also experimented with atonal samples that are not confined to soul, jazz, and funk. For example, he sampled and chopped up seminal electro-acoustic music from the 1960s on the track "Physical Stamina" by Jeru the Damaja.
In an interview with XXL Magazine, DJ Premier was asked how his sound evolved, to which he replied, "Marley Marl is my number-one inspiration. Jam Master Jay, Mix Master Ice, and UTFO. Grandmaster D, and Whodini. DJ Cheese, Grandmaster Flash, Kool Herc, Afrika Bambaataa. Jazzy Jay—even Cut Creator. Seeing them do what they do. It's black music, it's black culture, it comes from the ghetto. How can you not relate to ghetto people when that's the rawest form of blackness? Even though it's not a good place in regards to the economy and how bad people have it in the neighborhood, the realism's there, and that's what we were born out of. So I very much pay respect by doing the same type of music in return." DJ Premier attended Prairie View A&M University and may have been influenced by the musical atmosphere at the university while serving as the campus DJ and occasional performer with the world-famous Marching Storm band. He was a major progenitor of the boom-bap style of hip-hop production.


== Business career ==
As a businessman, DJ Premier has his own record company named Year Round Records. Among its artists are New York group NYGz, New Jersey rapper Nick Javas, and Houston rapper Khalil. Tha Blaqprint by Blaq Poet, which features 13 Premier productions, was released by Year Round Records through Fat Beats Records in June 2009.


== Legacy ==
For its 20th-anniversary issue in 2008, The Source selected DJ Premier for its list of the 20 greatest producers in the magazine's history. He also made the finals in Vibe magazine's 2010 search for the greatest hip hop producer of all time—he finished second after Dr. Dre received 62 percent of the votes.


== Discography ==

DJ Premier Presents Get Used To Us (2010)
Kolexxxion (with Bumpy Knuckles) (2012)
PRhyme (with Royce da 5'9") (2014)
PRhyme 2 (with Royce da 5'9") (2018)
Hip Hop 50: Vol. 1 (2022)


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
DJ Premier at AllMusic
DJ Premier discography at DiscogsSean Duval Price (March 17, 1972 – August 8, 2015) was an American rapper and member of the hip hop collective Boot Camp Clik. He was one half of the duo Heltah Skeltah, performing under the name Ruck, along with partner Rock.


== Early life and education ==
Growing up in the borough of Brooklyn, Price was a member of the Decepticons in high school.


== Career ==
A member of the underground hip hop collective Boot Camp Clik, Price first appeared on Smif-N-Wessun's 1995 album Dah Shinin'. He would soon resurface in 1996 as one half of the critically acclaimed Brooklyn duo Heltah Skeltah, who released their debut album Nocturnal on Duck Down Records that year. Heltah Skeltah would go on to release two more albums: 1998's Magnum Force and 2008's D.I.R.T..
In the 2000s, Price established himself as a strong force in the underground hip hop community. He was featured on Grand Theft Auto 3's GAME FM radio station in 2001. In 2005, Price released his first solo album Monkey Barz, to critical acclaim. He followed this in 2007 with Jesus Price Supastar and Mic Tyson in 2012.
Price was interviewed on the online series Grand Angel TV in 2008 and 2010, with Paid Dues performance footage alongside Boot Camp Clik and Dru Ha, respectively.
In 2011, Price was a judge on the Ultimate MC TV show alongside Royce da 5'9", Organik, Planet Asia, and Pharoahe Monch. Also in 2011, he formed the group Random Axe with Guilty Simpson and producer Black Milk.
He had a planned collaborative album with rapper Ill Bill in the works, called The Pill. Songs in the Key of Price, a mixtape recorded before Price's death, was released posthumously on August 21, 2015. The posthumous release of his fourth studio album, Imperius Rex, followed in August 2017.


== Death ==
On August 8, 2015, Price died at the age of 43. A statement from his reps confirmed his death, while adding that he died in his sleep.
"It is with beyond a heavy heart that Duck Down Music is sadly confirming that Sean Price passed away early this morning in his Brooklyn apartment, Saturday, August 8th, 2015," read the statement. "The cause of death is currently unknown, but it was reported that he died in his sleep. He's survived by his three children."


== Personal life ==
Price was a cousin of Roc-A-Fella Records rapper Memphis Bleek and actor Michael K. Williams. He was also close friends with actor Ryan Phillippe.Price lived in Brownsville, Brooklyn. He was a Muslim, having converted in 2009.


== Discography ==

Studio albums

Monkey Barz (2005)
Jesus Price Supastar (2007)
Mic Tyson (2012)
Imperius Rex (2017)


== References ==


== External links ==
Duck Down Records website
Sean Price at IMDbJames Austin Whipper II, better known by his stage name Prince Whipper Whip, is an American hip hop recording artist. He is of Puerto Rican descent and an original member of Grandwizard Theodore & the Fantastic Five.Whipper Whip appears in the music video for Ice-T's 1988 hit "High Rollers" and has guest appearances on records by The Beatnuts, Brother Ali, De La Soul, DJ Z-Trip, O.G.Funk Billy Bass Nelson & the Funkadelicks. Can I get a soul clap Fantastic Five, Wild Style Fantastic Five. Sabrosisimo, la vida, Tenemo Ritmo, Down by law with Kid Frost. This is hip hop, Respect with Charlie Chase & Breaking Bread records. 
Tuff city and Grand Master Caz.
Round by Round Grand Master Mele Mel & M C B .


== Personal life ==
He has four children: James Whipper III, Joshua Whipper, Sarah Whipper and Grace Whipper.


== References ==Concetta Suzanne Kirschner (born February 25, 1971), better known as Princess Superstar, is an American rapper and DJ. She has had two chart hits in the UK, "Bad Babysitter", which reached number 11 on the UK Singles Chart in 2002, and "Perfect (Exceeder)", which reached number three in 2007. She has recorded with Moby, The Prodigy, Arthur Baker, Prince Paul, and Grandmaster Flash, amongst others. During the peak of her career, she was acclaimed as Pennsylvania's top female Jewish rapper.
Her musical style, as she describes it, is "flip-flop"—a mixture of hip hop, electroclash and electronic. In summer 2014 she debuted her reality television show I Love Princess Superstar on her YouTube channel. In 2018 she released a children's record called These Are the Magic Days.


== Background ==
Kirschner was born in Spanish Harlem, New York City, New York to a Jewish father with ancestry from Russia and Poland, and a Sicilian-American mother who converted to Judaism. Kirschner identifies herself as a spiritual Jew.
Her parents were psychologists. When Kirschner was a child, the family moved to rural Pennsylvania and then to the suburbs of Philadelphia. She attended school at the Germantown Academy, a private high school, where she was a member of the Theatre Club and the Black Student Union. She moved to New York City at the age of 17 and went to NYU, where she got her BFA in drama. She is an active member of Superstar Machine, and was a member of Mensa. She is married to Luis Miguel Ortega and has a daughter Siren Ortega, and they live in Santa Monica, CA.


== Career ==
In New York City she took up the guitar, and her interest in music surpassed her interest in acting. She joined the Gamma Rays, an all-girl power psychedelic band that recorded a 7" single called "Lovely" for TeenBeat Records. Their other recordings appeared on various compilations. Around the same time, Kirschner was composing hip hop-styled songs on a 4-track recorder.


=== Princess Superstar ===
In 1994, Kirschner made a demo tape, Mitch Better Get My Bunny, under the name "Princess Superstar". She sent the tape to the College Music Journal and to the Beastie Boys' Grand Royal Records. While she got callbacks from CMJ and Grand Royal, she went on to sign with Dark Beloved Cloud Records, who released her song "I'm White" on their Sympathy for Count Pococurante compilation.
In 1995, she teamed up with three backing musicians and signed with 5th Beetle Records. They recorded her debut album, Strictly Platinum, which gained her some notoriety as being one of very few white female rappers.
In 1997, Kirschner went on to launch her own record label, first calling it "A Big Rich Major Label", but then eventually settling on "Corrupt Conglomerate". She recruited a new crew of backing musicians and recorded CEO, a concept album about corporate culture.
Her next album, 2000's Last of the Great 20th Century Composers, was co-produced by Curtis Curtis and contains the song "Kool Keith's Ass", and a remix of "Do It Like a Robot" by Blues Explosion.
Kirschner went on to collaborate with Kool Keith on "Keith and Me" for the 2001 Princess Superstar Is LP released on Ruthless Records/Studio !K7. The album, co-produced Curtis Curtis, has guest appearances by Beth Orton and Bahamadia. The single "Bad Babysitter" was number 11 on the UK Singles Chart.
For 2005's My Machine, a futuristic hip-hopera concept double album, she collaborated with various producers such as Arthur Baker, Jacques Lu Cont, Junior Sanchez, Armand Van Helden, Todd Terry, and DJ Mighty Mi. This went to number 3 on the UK chart in 2007.
In 2008, Kirschner sang on the "Licky" single by long-time associate Larry Tee which was featured in Get Him to the Greek and other movies and TV shows.
In 2009, Kirschner was featured on Grandmaster Flash's record The Bridge, alongside Snoop Dogg and Busta Rhymes.
Kirschner produced New York rapper Kalae All Day's debut album, released March 17, 2010.
In 2011, Kirschner released "Xmas Swagger" produced by the Rural.
Princess Superstar released her sixth studio album, The New Evolution, in 2013. The album was funded by Superstar's fans, using Pledge Music.In 2014, Princess Superstar began her Hip Hop for Kids classes at Rough Trade in Brooklyn. She also released the I'm a Firecracker EP in July with label Instant Records. That summer she launched the I Love Princess Superstar reality show on her YouTube channel. She also wrote the song "My Booty Is Efficient" with comedian Margaret Cho.In 2015, she appeared with Margaret Cho on The Late Show with Stephen Colbert.In 2016, she appeared on Inside Amy Schumer on Comedy Central.
In 2017, she recorded a children's album called These Are the Magic Days with producers Nacey, Steve Starks, C.Fire and engineered and mastered by Curtis Curtis (released on October 12, 2018).In 2019 She released a B-sides and Rarities record called "Look What I Found" featuring production by Junior Sanchez and Andrew Wyatt (Miike Snow, Lady Gaga.)
In 2020 She released the track 2020 with an accompanying video shot in Santa Monica, CA.
In 2021, she turned 50 years old and celebrated it by releasing the single and music video "Gettin' Older (Pussy Still Pop!)" with producer C. Fire.In 2023, she released the track "WHO AM I NOW", featuring Stefan Goldmann.


== DJ ==
Kirschner is also a DJ. She has released DJ recordings, such as Princess Is a DJ in 2002, Now Is the Winter of Our Discothèque in 2005, and American Gigolo III on International DeeJay Gigolo Records in 2007.


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===
Strictly Platinum (1996, 5th Beetle)
CEO (1997, A Big Rich Major Label)
Last of the Great 20th Century Composers (2000, Corrupt Conglomerate)
Princess Superstar Is (2001, Studio !K7/Rapster)
My Machine (2005, Studio !K7)
The Best of Princess Superstar (2007, Studio !K7)
The New Evolution (2013)
These Are the Magic Days (2018) – as M.O.M.


=== EPs ===
Mitch Better Get My Bunny cassette (1994)
I'm a Firecracker (2014, Instant Records)


=== Singles ===


=== Music videos ===
"Smooth" (1996)
"Bad Babysitter" (2002)
"Keith n' Me" (2002)
"Jam for the Ladies" (2003)
"Perfect" (2005)
"Perfect (Exceeder)" (2007)
"Licky" – Herve Radio edit (2008)
"Xmas Swagger" (2011)
"I'm a Firecracker" (2014)
"Motherfuckin' Emojis!" with Margaret Cho (2018)
"Errybody Quarantine" (2020)
"2020" (2020)
"Gettin' Older (Pussy Still Pop!)" (2021)
"The 2 Party System is Broken" (2022)


=== DJ albums ===
Princess Is a DJ (2002)
Now Is the Winter of Our Discothèque (2005)
Now Is the Winter of Our Discothèque Pt. 2 (2005)
American Gigolo III (2007)


=== Guest appearances ===
Interview on Channel V (Australia) with Yumi Stynes [2006]
MTV's "Made" - Made coach.
1998: Double Dong, "Promises" (Double Dong)
2000: MC Paul Barman, "MTV Get Off the Air, Part 2" (It's Very Stimulating)
2001: The High & Mighty, "The Jump Off" (Presents Eastern Conference All Stars II)
2003: Moby, "Jam for the Ladies" remix
2003: Disco D, "Fuck Me on the Dancefloor"
2003: Arthur Agent, "Return To NY"
2003: Gonzales, "Soft Shoe Snoozin" (Z)
2004: The Prodigy, "Memphis Bells" (Always Outnumbered, Never Outgunned)
2004: Munk, "Mein Schatzi" (Aperitivo)
2005: The High & Mighty, "Unholy Matrimony" (12th Man)
2005: XLOVER, "Darling Nikki" (Pleasure & Romance)
2006: Lotterboys, "Iron Man" (Animalia)
2006: Dr Octagon, "Eat It" (The Return of Dr. Octagon)
2006: DJs Are Not Rockstars, "European Accent"
2006: DJs Are Not Rockstars, "V.I.P."
2006: Arling & Cameron, "Computer" (Hi-Fi Underground)
2006: Diskokaines, "Lick The Alphabet"
2006: Diskokaines, "Rock-A-Boogie"
2006: LBL, "Goes Busters"
2006: Larry Tee, "Licky"
2006: One Fingered Pocket, "Pussy (Greenskeepers Remix)"
2006: DJ Yoda, "Let's Get Old" (The Amazing Adventures of DJ Yoda)
2006: Agoria, "Lips On Fire" (The Green Armchair)
2006: Fetisch, "Dayglo"
2007: The Glimmers, "Wanna Make Out"
2007: Shinichi Osawa, "Detonator" (The One)
2009: Sharam Jey & LouLou Players, "Monday Morning"
2009: Grandmaster Flash, "Those Chix" (The Bridge (Concept Of A Culture))
2009: Alexander Technique, "Rock U"
2011: George Monev, "Blowdryer"
2011: Zoo Brazil, "Do You Wanna Funk"
2015: Arling & Cameron, "Reanimated" and "80s" (Good Times)
2015: Margaret Cho "My Booty is Efficient"
2016: Amy Schumer "Amy's Girl Band"


== See also ==
List of female rappers


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
"I Love Princess Superstar" Reality Show
Interview with Princess SuperstarAlbert Johnson (November 2, 1974 – June 20, 2017), better known by his stage name Prodigy, was an American rapper. With Havoc, he was one half of the hip hop duo Mobb Deep.


== Early life ==
Prodigy was born on November 2, 1974, in Hempstead, New York, on Long Island. He was raised in LeFrak City in Queens. He had one elder brother, Greg Johnson. He came from a musical family. His grandfather Budd Johnson was a saxophonist who was inducted into the Big Band and Jazz Hall of Fame in 1993. His grand-uncle, Keg Johnson, was a trombonist. Both of them are remembered for their contributions to the bebop era of jazz. His mother, Fatima Frances (Collins) Johnson, was a member of The Crystals. His father, Budd Johnson Jr., was a member of a doo-wop music group called The Chanters. His great-great-great-grandfather, William Jefferson White, founded Georgia's Morehouse College.While attending the High School of Art and Design in Manhattan, he met his future music partner, Havoc. The duo became Poetical Prophets before choosing the name Mobb Deep. Under the alias Lord-T (The Golden Child), the then-16-year-old Johnson landed an uncredited guest appearance on the Boyz n the Hood soundtrack, for his collaborative efforts on the song "Too Young" by Hi-Five in 1991. In 1993, Mobb Deep released its debut album Juvenile Hell on 4th & B'way/Island/PolyGram Records.


== Music career ==


=== 1995–1999: The Infamous, Hell on Earth and Murda Muzik ===
Initially compared to fellow rapper Nas, who took a similar approach lyrically on his Illmatic album from 1994, Mobb Deep released The Infamous in 1995, which was certified Gold by the RIAA within the first two months of its release. 1995 was also the year that Prodigy began to raise his solo profile, by providing a guest appearance on LL Cool J's controversial "I Shot Ya (remix)". The song became a minor part of the East Coast–West Coast hip hop rivalry, due to Tupac Shakur believing the song to be a diss referring to his robbery/shooting in Manhattan, New York at Quad Recording Studios – singling out the song's title (which many assumed was connected to Biggie's "Who Shot Ya?"), certain lyrics, and the timing of its release – the year after the shooting incident.Although the track was stated by Keith Murray to not have any lyrical shots aimed at Tupac, Mobb Deep responded in the following year to Tupac's "Hit Em Up" with "Drop a Gem on 'Em," a promotional single from their 1996 album Hell On Earth. Ironically, "I Shot Ya" does feature a subliminal aim in Prodigy's verse to Murray, which continued friction that started sometime prior with an interlude from Mobb Deep's 1995 The Infamous album. The rivalry continued until sometime in 2012, when the two ended it by taking a picture together.A year and a half later, at the end of 1996, Prodigy and Havoc released Hell on Earth, which debuted at number six on SoundScan. Their next release, Murda Muzik, was heavily bootlegged while still in its demo stage, leaking, onto the streets and over the internet, rough versions of the nearly 30 songs the duo had recorded.


=== 2000–2006: H.N.I.C. ===
In November 2000, Prodigy released his debut solo album H.N.I.C. His followup solo album would be released in 2008.
During the next six years, between the releases of his first two solo albums, Prodigy continued to work with Mobb Deep, releasing Infamy in 2001, Amerikaz Nightmare in 2004, and Blood Money in 2006.


=== 2007–2011: Collaborations and H.N.I.C. Part 2 ===
During this time, Prodigy had started work on his second solo album, H.N.I.C. Part 2, which was first previewed on his official mixtape The Return of the Mac, and was later released on the independent label Koch Records. The mixtape single, together with the mixtape video, was called "Mac 10 Handle". Prodigy then released H.N.I.C. Pt. 2 through Voxonic Inc., a company in which he was an equity holder. In late 2009, Mobb Deep was released from their contract with 50 Cent's G-Unit label.During this time, Prodigy was served with a three-year sentence in Mid-State Correctional Facility (a medium-security prison), following a plea agreement stemming from a gun-possession charge. He was officially released on March 7, 2011.Prodigy was featured in the 2009 documentary Rhyme and Punishment, which documented hip-hop artists who had been incarcerated.In 2011, Prodigy released a free EP called The Ellsworth Bumpy Johnson EP, his first project after being released from prison.On April 21, a song titled "The Type", with Curren$y, was released on Curren$y's free album Covert Coup.In 2011, Prodigy released his autobiography, My Infamous Life: The Autobiography of Mobb Deep's Prodigy.


=== 2013–2014: The Infamous Mobb Deep ===
In 2013, Prodigy released his second collaboration album with the Alchemist, titled Albert Einstein. On April 1, 2014, Mobb Deep released The Infamous Mobb Deep, their eighth studio album. In August 2016, he released an untitled EP of five tracks, in partnership with BitTorrent, an association that Prodigy had been working up for a while.


== Books ==
In 2011, Prodigy released his autobiography, My Infamous Life: The Autobiography of Mobb Deep's Prodigy. It was co-written with Laura Checkoway and published by Touchstone Books.In 2013 Prodigy co-wrote the urban crime novel H.N.I.C. with British author Steven Savile. It was published by Akashic / Infamous Books. They also co-wrote a second novel,  Ritual, that was released in 2015 by Akashic.Prodigy co-wrote a cookbook with Kathy Iandoli titled Commissary Kitchen: My Infamous Prison Cookbook. It features a foreword by chef and food personality Eddie Huang and was published in 2016 by Infamous Books.


== Legal issues ==
The following is a brief timeline and chronology of some of the legal issues that Prodigy faced during his life:

November 6, 2003, Prodigy was arrested in Cohoes, New York, and charged with third degree criminal possession of a weapon and unlawful possession of cannabis. Police reportedly recovered a .25 caliber handgun and cannabis on his person.
October 26, 2006, Prodigy was arrested in New York City and charged with criminal possession of a weapon. He was pulled over in a $120,000 customized bulletproof SUV after making an illegal u-turn around 2:15 AM. After conducting a search of the vehicle, police recovered a .22 caliber handgun in the center console.
October 8, 2007, Prodigy was sentenced to serve three-and-a-half years in prison for illegal possession of a firearm. Originally facing a mandatory sentence of 15 years in prison, Prodigy struck a deal with the prosecution, and pleaded guilty in exchange for the shorter prison sentence.
March 7, 2011, Prodigy was released from Mid-State Correctional Facility in Marcy, New York after serving three years for criminal possession of a weapon. His sentence was reduced by six months for good behavior and he remained on parole until 2014.


== Feuds ==


=== West Coast ===
From 1995 to 1997, the media-fueled "East Coast-West Coast hip hop rivalry" was occurring. This started when Tha Dogg Pound released "New York, New York," to which Mobb Deep took offense, as, in addition to the lyrics, the song's music video portrayed New York buildings being stomped on by Dogg Pound members. In response, Mobb Deep with Capone-N-Noreaga and Tragedy Khadafi released "LA, LA". 2Pac "dissed" Mobb Deep (along with The Notorious B.I.G.) in "Hit 'Em Up" where, in the outro of the song, he made a remark in clear reference to Prodigy's ailment in having sickle cell anemia. Mobb Deep responded in a track called "Drop A Gem On 'Em" which was released as a single 2 weeks before 2Pac was murdered. 2Pac also dissed Mobb Deep on the song "Against All Odds" and "Bomb First (My Second Reply)" which were released after his death. But Prodigy later sampled 2Pac's voice from a freestyle for the chorus on the song "Return of the Mac" (a.k.a. "New York Shit") on his album with the same name.


=== Def Squad ===
On The Infamous track "The Infamous Prelude", Prodigy made remarks about rappers who rap about "smoking weed" and talk about "space shit". Def Squad took offense from this, but the feud was settled when Prodigy and Keith Murray met at a video shoot. The feud was rekindled when Prodigy again referenced "space shit" in his appearance on LL Cool J's "I Shot Ya" which also featured Murray. Murray saw Prodigy at a club one night and punched him. Prodigy recalled the altercation and threatened Murray in the song "In the Long Run" on Hell on Earth. Murray released a song "Call My Name" on his Enigma album dissing Mobb Deep. The feud seemed to die down until Prodigy dissed Murray again in his 2004 song "Bad Blood." Murray has responded with numerous songs since. The feud has since died down, with the two sharing a photograph together with Busta Rhymes on social media. On Twitter, The reconciliation was confirmed by Prodigy in response to the photo not long after.


=== Saigon ===
During an interview, Prodigy stated that he did not like Saigon and Tru-Life (along with many other rappers).On the night of September 19, 2007, after an impromptu performance by Saigon during a Mobb Deep show, words were exchanged between Saigon and Prodigy. This escalated into an argument, which resulted in a physical altercation when Saigon punched Prodigy twice before leaving the club. Two video versions of the events have since emerged. One version, in slow motion footage, showed Saigon hiding under a table. Another released version of the video, showed Saigon running away from the club. The feud, however, apparently died down, since (in an interview two months before Prodigy's release from prison) Saigon expressed happiness that Prodigy was coming home.


=== Crooked I ===
While in prison, Prodigy wrote a letter about his disillusionment with hip hop and rappers. He directly referenced Crooked I's name in the letter, commenting,

Vibe says 920,000 people voted for it. I would personally b*tch slap all 920,000 of these voters if given the opportunity. Who in the f*ck picked Crooked I, Flo Rida and Rich Boy? How did Vibe approve this?
Crooked I responded in a blog entry, and challenged Prodigy to a one-on-one fight upon the rapper's release. Following Prodigy's death, Crooked I paid tribute in honor of him by posting an image of him on Instagram.


=== Havoc ===
In July 2012, Prodigy's musical partner, Havoc, wrote a series of derogatory comments about Prodigy on Twitter, including accusing Prodigy of engaging in homosexual relationships in prison. At first, Havoc claimed that his Twitter account was hacked. However, he later confirmed that he wrote the tweets and expressed his frustrations with Prodigy in an interview with AllHipHop. He stated that Mobb Deep was on an "indefinite hiatus" until the duo worked out their differences. Havoc later released a diss track aimed at Prodigy, which was titled "Separated (Real from the Fake)". Prodigy did not respond to Havoc's song and, even stated publicly, that Mobb Deep would eventually reconcile. In March 2013, the duo announced that they had reconciled and were going on tour.


== Illuminati theory ==

Some hip hop music has been inspired by the theory that a powerful international secret society exists. Often it is referred to as the Illuminati, after the Bavarian secret society founded in 1776. Complex magazine has claimed it was Prodigy who started the interest in the theory. Prodigy had often spoken publicly against the alleged international secret society during his life.Prodigy rhymed about a secret society in his collaboration with LL Cool J in the song "I Shot Ya (Remix)", from the 1995 album Mr. Smith. From prison in 2007, not long before the release of H.N.I.C. Part 2, Prodigy wrote and published an open letter to Jay-Z in which he made some cryptic allegations alluding to the theory. In 2008, Prodigy titled a song "Illuminati", from H.N.I.C. Part 2. In his final solo album released during his life, The Hegelian Dialectic (2017), Prodigy also referred to the theory. It was reported that Prodigy was working on a musical about his Illuminati theory at the time of his death.


== Illness and death ==
In an interview with Vibe in November 2000, Prodigy spoke about what inspired him to directly address his battle with sickle cell disease in his song "You Can Never Feel My Pain", from his debut studio album H.N.I.C. He attributed his nihilism to the "permanent physical suffering" caused by his lifelong battle with the condition.On June 20, 2017, it was reported that Prodigy had died at the Spring Valley Medical Center in Las Vegas, Nevada, while hospitalized for complications related to his sickle-cell anemia. He was performing in the Art of Rap Tour in Las Vegas with Havoc, Ghostface Killah, Onyx, KRS-One, and Ice-T when he was hospitalized.According to a coroner's report, Prodigy was admitted to Spring Valley Medical Center after suffering a significant medical episode arising from his life-long battle with sickle-cell anemia. Days later, on the morning of June 20, he was found unresponsive by hospital staff. It was reported at the time that Prodigy died from accidental choking. The complaint, which was filed on behalf of the family by the Gage Law Firm, alleges that the Spring Valley hospital breached their duty of care for Prodigy by "failing to maintain a working IV access," and by "failing to continuously monitor oxygen levels" as ordered by physicians in the hospital, and that those failures led to Prodigy's death.


== Discography ==

Studio albums

H.N.I.C. (2000)
H.N.I.C. Pt. 2 (2008)
H.N.I.C. 3 (2012)
The Bumpy Johnson Album (2012)
Hegelian Dialectic (The Book of Revelation) (2017)Posthumous studio album

The Hegelian Dialectic 2 (The Book of Heroine) (2022)Collaboration albums

Return of the Mac (with the Alchemist) (2007)
Product of the 80's (with Big Twins & Un Pacino) (2008)
Albert Einstein (with the Alchemist) (2013)
Young Rollin Stonerz (with Boogz Boogetz) (2014)


== Filmography ==
Murda Muzik (1999)
Full Clip (2004)
Blackout (2007)
Rhyme and Punishment (2011)


== References ==


== Publications ==
Albert "Prodigy" Johnson; Laura Checkoway (2012). My Infamous Life: The Autobiography of Mobb Deep's Prodigy. Touchstone Books. ISBN 978-1-4391-0319-7.
Albert "Prodigy" Johnson; Steven Savile (2013). H.N.I.C: An Infamous Novella. Akashic Books. ISBN 978-1-61775-236-0.
Albert "Prodigy" Johnson; Kathy Iandoli (2016). Commissary Kitchen: My Infamous Prison Cookbook. Infamous Books. ISBN 978-0-9971462-3-3.
Albert "Prodigy" Johnson; Kathy Iandoli (2017). The State vs. Albert "Prodigy" Johnson. Infamous Books. ISBN 978-0-9971462-0-2.


== External links ==
Prodigy at Last.fm
Prodigy lyricsWilliam Paul Mitchell (born March 21, 1972), better known by the stage name of Large Professor (also Extra P. and Large Pro), is an American rapper and music producer. Based in New York City, he is known as a founding member of the underground hip hop group Main Source and as a mentor and frequent collaborator of Nas. About.com ranked Large Professor at No. 13 on its Top 25 Hip-Hop Producers list.


== Early life and education ==
William Paul Mitchell was born in Harlem, New York City, and raised in Flushing, Queens, New York City, where he attended John Bowne High School.


== Career ==
Large Professor started making his earliest beats with two turntables, a Casio SK-1 sampler, and pause-tape cassettes before his mentor Paul C taught him how to use an E-mu SP-1200. During his pause tape phase he noted that some of his techniques were different than those of other producers. "I was trying to catch it from a different part of the record. I would catch it from the hi-hat when dudes were just catching it from the one kick. I would catch it from the third hi-hat and be flipping it."In 1989 he joined the group Main Source, which also included Toronto natives K-Cut and Sir Scratch. In 1990 Large produced three tracks for Eric B. & Rakim's Let the Rhythm Hit 'Em, including "In the Ghetto". To make "In the Ghetto", he sampled directly off of a cassette tape of sample ideas Paul C had made for Rakim.Main Source recorded one album with Large called Breaking Atoms, which was released in 1991. It included hits such as "Just Hangin' Out", "Looking at the Front Door", and featured Nas' first public appearance on a track called "Live at the Barbeque", along with Akinyele and Joe Fatal. Large Professor now considers "Looking at the Front Door" one of the most emotional records of his career, later saying "That's a deep record. At that time in life, I was eighteen years old. It was a kid with a pure heart, just writing, and putting his soul out there for the world."In 1992, their success allowed them to record "Fakin' the Funk", a track on the White Men Can't Jump motion-picture soundtrack. Because of business differences, Large and Main Source quietly parted ways and Large went on to sign with Geffen Records.
During and after his tenure with Main Source, he worked with Pete Rock & CL Smooth, and he produced a number of tracks for Nas, Busta Rhymes, Masta Ace, The X-Ecutioners, Tragedy Khadafi, Big Daddy Kane, Mobb Deep, A Tribe Called Quest, and others during the 1990s. During this time he handled a significant amount of production on several projects for other artists. In 1993 he produced Akinyele's entire Vagina Diner album, which experienced some modest commercial success at the time of its release. Though the album did well at first, The Source later wrote an article criticizing the song "I Luh Huh", in which Akinyele considers pushing his pregnant girlfriend down the stairs as a form of abortion. The ensuing backlash for the controversial lyrics hurt the album's performance. Akinyele wrote a response in the next issue defending the song and pointing out that the violent ideas in the songs are just thoughts, and he ends the song by saying "Just cause I talk this shit don't get me wrong, Yo, I still luh hur."Large Professor also produced "Keep It Rollin'" on A Tribe Called Quest's Midnight Marauders not long after he left Main Source. This was a major moment in his career that helped him reach a new level of credibility and exposure as a solo artist.In 1994, Large Professor produced three of the ten songs on Nas's Illmatic ("Halftime", "One Time 4 Your Mind", and "It Ain't Hard to Tell"), the most of any producer involved with the album. According to an interview with Busta Rhymes, the "Halftime" beat was originally intended for him. Though he liked the beat, he didn't end up using it and later regretted it after hearing "Halftime". While describing the making of the song in an interview Large Pro said, "I mean, we just wanted to put something gritty out there to the world, and those drums—that's what it was at that time. It was that gritty, muffled out, because the Hip Hop that we grew up with… We grew up with park jam tapes and things like the fidelity of these tapes." He was so instrumental in the making of Illmatic that Nas wanted to give him an executive producer credit, but he refused.In 1996, Large Professor completed his debut solo album The LP for Geffen Records. It was promoted by the singles "The Mad Scientist" and "I Juswannachill". After several delays, the album was shelved and later released as a bootleg version in 2002. An official release of the album finally came out in 2009, thirteen years after its original intended release date.In 2001, Large Pro produced "You're da Man" and "Rewind" for Nas's Stillmatic album. He first played Nas the beat for "You're da Man" while Nas was working on Nastradamus a few years prior. Nas chose the beat but decided to save it for a later project. Large Professor also used the same vocal sample from the chorus on the song "The Man"  for his 1st Class album.
On December 22, 2002, at a concert in Toronto, the original members of Main Source performed together for the first time in nearly 10 years.


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===
with Main Source1991: Breaking AtomsSolo albums1996: The LP (officially released in 2009)
2002: 1st Class
2008: Main Source
2012: Professor @ Large
2015: Re:LivingCollaboration albums1993: Vagina Diner (with Akinyele)
2014: Mega Philosophy (with Cormega)Instrumental albums2006: Beatz Volume 1
2007: Beatz Volume 2
2022: Beatz Volume 3


=== Guest appearances ===
1990: "Money In The Bank" (Kool G Rap & DJ Polo album Wanted: Dead or Alive)
1993: "Keep It Rollin'" (A Tribe Called Quest album Midnight Marauders)
1994: "Stress (Remix)" (Organized Konfusion "Stress" 12")
1995: "Extra Abtract Skillz" (Mad Skillz album From Where???)
1996: "To Each His Own (Feat. Pete Rock Grap Luva, Q-Tip, Rob-O)"  album Lost & Found: Hip Hop Underground Soul Classics
1996: "Actual Facts" (Lord Finesse album The Awakening)
1998: "Truly Yours '98" (Pete Rock album Soul Survivor)
2000: "The Last Shall Be First" (Cella Dwellas album The Last Shall Be First)
2002: "XL" (The X-Ecutioners album Built from Scratch)
2002: "Hip Hop On Wax" (Rob Swift album Sound Event)
2002: "The Come Up" (Cormega album The True Meaning)
2004: "Sugar Ray and Hearns" (Cormega album Legal Hustle)
2004: "Out Da Box" (Tony Touch album The Piece Maker 2)
2006: "United" (MF Grimm album American Hunger)
2007: "The Radar" (Marco Polo album Port Authority)
2007: "The Purist" (Polyrhythm Addicts album Break Glass)
2008: "Conquer Mentally" (Presto album State of the Art)
2008: "Chill" (Changes of Atmosphere Album) 
2009: "Fans" (Masta Ace & Edo G album Arts & Entertainment)
2009: "Sweet 16s" (Satchel Page album Young Patriarch)
2009: "Like This" (No Sellout: Ground Original 2(album))
2011: "Beats By The Pound" (Soulbrotha The Connexion EP)
2011: "The Quickening" (Funkoars)
2011: "Through Good & Bad" (The Funk League album Funky As Usual)
2012: "Forever" (Gensu Dean album Lo-Fi Fingahz)
2012: "Loco-Motive" (Nas album Life Is Good)
2012: "Catch the Thrown" (Public Enemy album Most of My Heroes Still Don't Appear on No Stamp)
2012: "Back & 4th Scrambler" (Yu Mamiya)
2013: "Built Pyramids" (N.O.R.E. album Student of the Game)
2013: "Astonishing" (Marco Polo album PA2: The Director's Cut)
2014: "Naturally Born" (with Big Noyd & Kool G Rap)
2015: "World Premier" (Czarface album Every Hero Needs a Villain)
2016: "Glorify N Praise" (Powerule)
2016: "Everybody Everywhere" (Mighty Mi)
2016: "Here We Go" (Southpaw Chop)
2017: "Come a Long Way featuring Large Professor and Masta Ace" (Son of Sam album Cinder Hill)
2017: "Come a Long Way – Extra P Remix featuring Large Professor and Masta Ace" (Son of Sam single from the album Cinder Hill, Produced by Large Professor)


== References ==


== External links ==

Large Professor on Twitter 
Biography Sketch at Matador Records website
Large Professor's at Beatbuggy
Large Professor at AllMusicAlfred Schoeninger (born June 16, 1981), better known by his stage name Mopes, and formerly Prolyphic, is an American hip hop musician from Rhode Island. He is one half of the duo Stick Figures along with Robust and is currently signed to Strange Famous Records.


== Musical career ==
Prolyphic first became known in 1999 when he had recorded a demo tape and shopped it around Scribble Jam, which caught the attention of artists such as Sage Francis, Sole and Scribble Jam founder Kevin Beacham. Following this, he and Sage Francis continued trading demo tapes and became more familiar with each other through the local Rhode Island hip hop circuit. They continued to stay friends and Sage Francis eventually signed Prolyphic to his label, Strange Famous Records. He became the second artist signed to the label, after B. Dolan.In 2005, he released Stick Figures' self titled debut album. The same year, he was introduced by Sage Francis to hip hop producer Reanimator. Together, the two released the critically acclaimed album The Ugly Truth on Strange Famous Records in 2008. It features guest appearances from Alias, Macromantics and Sage Francis, among others.He released Working Man, a collaborative album with London hip hop producer Buddy Peace in 2013, also on Strange Famous Records.In 2016, he released DNGRFLD, a fully self produced album on Strange Famous, which features Seez Mics and Cas One.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===
An Alarm Clock Set for 9:01 (2003)
Time's Table Scraps (2006)
The Ugly Truth (2008) (with Reanimator)
Working Man (2013) (with Buddy Peace)
DNGRFLD (2016)


=== Stick Figures (with Robust) ===
Stick Figures (2005)


=== Singles ===
"Get Out What You Put In" (2005)
"Artist Goes Pop" (2008) (with Reanimator)


=== Guest appearances ===
Robust - "Thinking Ahead of Time" from Potholes in Our Molecules (2004)
Sage Francis - "SFR Pays Dues" from Sick of Wasting (2009)
Guante and Big Cats! - "The Stockholm Syndrome" from An Unwelcome Guest (2009)
B. Dolan - "Survived Another Winter" from House of Bees Vol. 1 (2009)
Cas One - "Vultures" from The Monster And The Wishing Well (2013)
Metermaids - "I'm Alive So Everything I Own Is My Lucky Everything" from We Brought Knives (2014)
The Funk Junkie - "Originals" from Moondirt (2017)


=== Productions ===
Sage Francis - "Things To Do In Denver When You're Dead To Me" from Sick to D(eat)h (2013)
Sage Francis - "Vonnegut Busy" from Copper Gone (2014)


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website 
Prolyphic discography at DiscogsRobert Alan Diaz  (September 17, 1975 – June 9, 2015) known by his stage name Pumpkinhead or P.H., was an American rapper and hip hop artist. He grew up in the Park Slope area of Brooklyn, New York with his mother and younger sister.


== Music career ==
Pumpkinhead started writing rap lyrics at age 10 during his 6th grade language arts class after hearing the song "Nightmares" by Dana Dane. He also stated he was influenced by Redman and the Leaders of the New School, as well as Doug E. Fresh. He also cites his experience of meeting 2Pac and witnessing his ability to write and record songs on the spot as a motivating factor in his emceeing.Pumpkinhead got a break in New York City hip hop when a friend of his gave a demo tape to Bobbito Garcia of the Stretch & Bobbito Show on WKCR.Pumpkinhead's breakthrough single was 1997's "Dynamic," which became a staple of mixtapes in the late 1990s. The World Famous Beat Junkies featured the remix—featuring guest appearances by Poka Face, Meat Pie, Ocean, What? What?, CES, DCQ and The Bad Seed—on their second mix CD, The World Famous Beat Junkies, Vol. 2 in 1998.
Pumpkinhead has been a guest on several hip hop albums by other artists. He appears on Immortal Technique's Revolutionary Vol. 1 (2001) and Revolutionary Vol. 2 (2003).
He guest starred on Jean Grae's 2003 EP The Bootleg of the Bootleg, appearing on the track "Code Red" with  Block McCloud. In 2013 he appeared on the track "Welcome To The Show" alongside Long Island emcees the Lab Ratz (Dave Z and Lantz). In 2009, he started going by PH and released My Era (No Skinny Jeans Allowed), a mixtape remixing several 90's classics.


== Death ==
Pumpkinhead died  on June 9, 2015, in a New Jersey hospital, while waiting to undergo a gall stone surgery. The cause of death has not been disclosed.Multiple artists offered their condolences on social media. Talib Kweli wrote on Instagram "To lose such a great human being so early in his life, man. No words...There is a fraternity of artists who were around for all of this. PH inspired us all. He will live on through us even though his physical presence will be missed. RIP Robert Diaz". Immortal Technique wrote on Twitter "Rest in Power my old friend. Life is too short. #Pumpkinhead #PH #RobertDiazRIP", while Brother Ali wrote "Heartbroken to learn about the great Pumpkinhead transitioning from his life. Incredible MC and precious soul. Loved, Honored & Remembered."A street in Park Slope, Brooklyn, was named in his honor.


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===
The Old Testament (2001) Label: Makin' Records
Orange Moon Over Brooklyn (2005) Label: Soulspazm (Rawkus- 2006 re-release)
Picture That: The Negative (2008) Label: MCMI
Know the Ledge as PH (2011) Label: MCMI


=== EPs ===
Beautiful Mind (2003) Label: Third Earth Music
This is Not a Tyler Perry Movie as PH (2014) Label: MCMI


=== Mixtapes ===
Gang Green: The Plague MixCD Vol. 1 as part of The Plague (2002)
Time Chronicles (2004)
Time Chronicles 2 (2004)
Kill Music: Vol. 1 (2004)
"Kill Music: Vol. 2" (?)
28 Tracks Later: The Plague MixCD Vol. 2 as part of the Plague (2004)
Border Blockerz Part 1 (2007)
#SleezbagMekalekTape (2016) (released posthumously)


== References ==Terrence LeVarr Thornton (born May 13, 1977), better known by his stage name Pusha T, is an American rapper, songwriter, and record executive. He rose to prominence as one-half of the Virginia-based hip hop duo Clipse, which was mainly active from 1994 to 2010, alongside his older brother No Malice. As Clipse, the two released three studio albums upon signing to Pharrell's Star Trak Entertainment; they became best known for their 2002 debut single "Grindin'".
In September 2010, Pusha T signed a deal with Kanye West's GOOD Music record label, an imprint of Def Jam Recordings. Later that year, he was featured on West's single "Runaway," which peaked at number 12 on the Billboard Hot 100. In 2011, he released his first solo project, the mixtape Fear of God, which preceded his debut solo album, My Name Is My Name, released in 2013. In November 2015, West appointed Pusha T to take over his role as president of GOOD Music, remaining one of the label’s flagship artists until his departure and dissociation with West in 2022.Pusha T has released a further three solo albums: King Push – Darkest Before Dawn: The Prelude (2015), Daytona (2018), and It's Almost Dry (2022), all of which received widespread critical acclaim; the latter became his first album to debut atop the Billboard 200. Throughout his career, Pusha T has received five Grammy Award nominations. In 2020, he launched his own record label, Heir Wave Music Group, which aims as a platform for Virgina-based artists.


== Early life ==
Pusha T was born Terrence LeVarr Thornton on May 13, 1977, in the Bronx borough of New York City, though the family soon relocated to Virginia Beach, Virginia, where he and his brother, Gene Thornton, grew up. As teenagers, the brothers both sold drugs, with Gene eventually being kicked out of their parents' house after they discovered what he was doing. In 1992, alongside his brother, the two began to pursue a career in hip hop, forming a group known as Clipse. His older brother Gene was known for most of the group's duration as Malice (the two were originally known as Terrar and Malicious, respectively, and in 2012 Gene changed his stage name to No Malice, following a conversion to Christianity).


== Career ==


=== 1993–2010: Clipse ===

Shortly after forming Clipse, the brothers were introduced to record producer and fellow Virginian Pharrell Williams of The Neptunes, who helped them secure a recording contract with Elektra Records in 1997. Terrence initially took the stage name Terrar. After being signed to Elektra, they began working on their debut album, Exclusive Audio Footage. After recording the entire album, they released one single, "The Funeral", which was commercially unsuccessful and eventually led to the release of the album being cancelled and Clipse being dropped from the label shortly after. After being dropped, Terrar changed his name to Pusha T, and despite not being signed to a major label, he made numerous appearances on other artists' songs, appearing on Kelis' 1999 single "Good Stuff" and Nivea's 2001 single "Run Away (I Wanna Be with U)", respectively, thanks to his relationship with The Neptunes, who produced both songs.
In early 2001, Pharrell Williams signed the duo to Arista Records through his recently established Star Trak imprint. Clipse began working on their major label debut, executively produced by The Neptunes. Their debut single, Grindin' was released on May 14, 2002, and became a summer Top 40 hit, reaching number 30 on the Billboard Hot 100 on July 30, 2002. Similar success followed with their second single, When the Last Time, which peaked at #19. Fueled by two successful singles, Clipse released their commercial debut album Lord Willin' on August 20, 2002, debuting at #1 on Billboard's Top R&B/Hip-hop Album chart and #4 on the Billboard 200, eventually being certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) on October 1, 2002.
In late 2003, Clipse began recording material for their second album, Hell Hath No Fury. However, further work on the album ground to a halt in 2004, when Arista Records's urban artists were absorbed into its sister label Jive Records as part of a larger merger between Sony Music Entertainment and BMG. Due to contractual requirements, Clipse was forced to stay on Jive, while Star Trak and the rest of its roster moved to their new home at Interscope Records. While Clipse resumed work on the album, and eventually finished recording it, the duo became increasingly frustrated with Jive, as the label was notorious for overlooking various hip-hop/R&B artists in favor of more pop-oriented acts on its roster. The label's musical strategy expansion caused numerous delays in the release of Hell Hath No Fury. As delays continued, the group asked for a formal release from its contract. When Jive refused to grant this request, the duo sued the label. In response to this, in 2004, the brothers launched their own record label imprint, Re-Up Records, and formed the hip hop group Re-Up Gang, along with fellow rappers Ab-Liva and Sandman.

On May 9, 2006, Clipse finally reached an agreement with Jive to release the album through both Re-Up and Jive. Hell Hath No Fury was finally released on November 28, 2006. Once again produced by The Neptunes, it debuted at #14 on the Billboard 200 with over 80,000 copies sold in the 1st week. While the album received a great deal of critical acclaim, its sales were less successful than Lord Willin'. It spawned two moderately successful singles: "Mr. Me Too" with Pharrell Williams and "Wamp Wamp (What It Do)" with Slim Thug. Clipse's frustrations with Jive were a constant theme of the album, with Pusha T saying "I'm sorry to the fans, but them crackers weren't playing fair at Jive" on the track Mr. Me Too. The hip hop magazine XXL gave the album a "XXL" rating, marking it as a five-star album. At the time only five albums had previously received that honor.  In a May 19, 2007, interview with Eye Weekly, Clipse revealed that they had been officially released from any contractual obligations with Jive. After this, the duo began discussions with several record labels, eventually signing with Columbia Records on October 26, 2007. The follow-up to Hell Hath No Fury, titled Til the Casket Drops, was released on December 8, 2009, via Columbia Records. In a departure from the group's previous works, which only featured production from the Neptunes, the album features production from Sean "Diddy" Combs' production team The Hitmen, and DJ Khalil among others. The album peaked at No. 41 on the Billboard 200.


=== 2010–2011: Solo career beginnings ===
After releasing their third album, Pusha T and Malice announced Clipse would be going on indefinite hiatus so the brothers could focus on their solo careers. Shortly after this, Pusha T was signed to Kanye West's GOOD Music label in September 2010, and made his first appearance as a member of the GOOD roster on Kanye West's My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy, appearing on his hit "Runaway" and premiering the song with him at the 2010 MTV Video Music Awards on September 12, 2010. He was also featured on several tracks from West's GOOD Fridays series and made other appearances on Swizz Beatz's Monster Mondays series, Lloyd Banks' H.F.M. 2 (Hunger for More 2) and Tabi Bonney's Fresh, respectively. On the week of December 16, 2010, Pusha T signed an exclusive management deal with NUE Agency. On February 11, 2011, Funkmaster Flex debuted Pusha T's debut solo single on New York City's Hot 97. The track, titled "My God", was produced by Hit-Boy and was generally well received by the public. Soon after, the song leaked onto the internet, however was not officially released through iTunes and Amazon until August 24, 2011. On August 31, 2011, it was announced Pusha had signed a solo record deal with Def Jam.On March 21, 2011, Pusha T released his solo debut, a mixtape titled Fear of God, which included "My God" and featured both freestyles and original songs, and included features from Kanye West, 50 Cent, Rick Ross, Pharrell Williams and Kevin Cossom. The mixtape was well received, and soon after he began working on his debut extended play (EP) Fear of God II: Let Us Pray, which initially included four songs from the mixtape and five new songs. The EP was originally set to be released on June 21, 2011; however, it was pushed back to August 23, and for a while September 27 was believed to be the date, but after it came and went, on October 6, 2011, Pusha T announced the EP was set to be released on November 8, 2011. In addition, it was revealed he had added four more songs to the EP, bringing it to 12 tracks in total.  Considered a re-release of the initial Fear of God, it was released on November 8, 2011, and was well received by critics.
The first single from Fear of God II: Let Us Pray was leaked onto the Internet on July 8, 2011. The song, titled "Trouble on My Mind", features Odd Future frontman Tyler, The Creator. The EP's second single, "Amen", was released September 13, 2011. The song, originally meant for Young Jeezy, was produced by Shawty Redd and features verses from Kanye West and Young Jeezy, respectively. After the EP's release on November 8, the project debuted at number 66 on the Billboard 200 with 8,900 copies sold in its first week released. It also entered at number ten on Billboard's R&B/Hip-Hop Albums, at number eight on Billboard's Top Rap Albums, and at number 25 on its Digital Albums chart.In 2011, Pusha T appeared on the second season of the HBO series How to Make It in America. He played the role of a henchman for Urban Caribbean League. After the release of his EP, Pusha T started working on his solo debut studio album, which would be executively produced by Kanye West. Pusha also said that after the release of his solo debut album and the Re-Up Gang mixtape, Long Live the Cane, Clipse would also reunite and release another album. In late 2011, Pusha made a guest appearance on English pop music|pop singer Pixie Lott's "What Do You Take Me For?", the second single from her second studio album Young Foolish Happy. The song was a hit single in the UK, peaking at number ten on the UK Top 40.


=== 2012–2014: My Name Is My Name ===

On October 19, 2011, via Twitter, Kanye West announced plans for a Spring 2012 GOOD Music album, featuring all artists from the label as well as numerous guest appearances. On April 6, 2012, "Mercy", the lead single from the GOOD Music compilation album Cruel Summer was released. The song, produced by newly signed in-house producer Lifted, features Pusha T along with Kanye West, Big Sean and southern rapper 2 Chainz. On May 24, 2012, Pusha T released a song titled "Exodus 23:1" featuring The-Dream. It is speculated that the song is a diss track aimed at Young Money rappers Drake and Lil Wayne. This resulted in a diss-song by Lil Wayne, which Pusha T did not directly respond to, but branded it as "horrible" in an interview. He was featured alongside West on the third single for Cruel Summer - "New God Flow". In October 2012, Pusha T made an appearance on the soundtrack to the film The Man with the Iron Fists on a track titled "Tick Tock" alongside fellow American rappers Raekwon, Joell Ortiz and Danny Brown.On October 8, 2012, Pusha T released "Pain" featuring southern rapper Future, the first single from his debut album. That same day Spin magazine reported that Pusha T's debut album had been pushed back until 2013. While performing in Vancouver, Canada, it was reported that Pusha T announced he would be releasing a mixtape entitled Wrath of Caine preceding the release of his debut studio album. Later in November, Thornton announced the title of his debut studio album to be My Name Is My Name. On December 5, 2012, Pusha T released "Blocka" the first single from his Wrath of Caine mixtape. The song features Travis Scott and Popcaan. The music video for the song was released on December 11, 2012. The mixtape was released on January 28, 2013, along with the announcement of his album coming at the end of the first quarter of 2013. In January 2013 it was announced that Pusha would be performing at the 2013 Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival.
My Name Is My Name was scheduled to be released on July 16, 2013, but was pushed back to October. Pusha T's debut studio album was released on October 8, 2013, featuring guest appearances from Rick Ross, Young Jeezy, 2 Chainz, Big Sean, Future, Pharrell Williams, Chris Brown and Kendrick Lamar, among others. The album was met with acclaim from music critics and was positioned high on many "Best Albums of 2013" lists by major publications. The album also fared well commercially, debuting at number 4 on the US Billboard 200, selling 74,000 copies in its first week of release. As of July 8, 2017, the album has sold 182,000 copies in the United States. The album was promoted by five singles: "Pain" featuring Future, "Numbers on the Boards", "Sweet Serenade" featuring Chris Brown, "Let Me Love You" featuring Kelly Rowland, and "Nosetalgia" featuring Kendrick Lamar, along with the promotional single "Who I Am" featuring 2 Chainz and Big Sean. The album includes production from Kanye West, The Neptunes, The-Dream, Just Blaze, No I.D., Nottz, Don Cannon and Swizz Beatz, among others. In an April 2013 interview with AskMen, Pusha revealed that shortly after his debut album was released, he would finish working on his second album, titled King Push. In 2013, Pusha T provided guest vocals over a Vice remix of "I'll Be Gone" for the remix album, Recharged, by American rock band Linkin Park.


=== 2014–2018: King Push – Darkest Before Dawn ===

On November 19, 2014, Pusha released a single titled "Lunch Money", produced by Kanye West.In December 2014, Pusha T King Push for a Spring 2015 release. In May 2015, he announced the album would be pushed back to June. On November 9, 2015, Pusha T revealed to Billboard that he had been appointed the new president of GOOD Music.
On November 12, 2015, Pusha T released a single titled "Untouchable", produced by Timbaland. On November 23, 2015, it was announced that Pusha T would release a new album, King Push – Darkest Before Dawn: The Prelude before the aforementioned King Push album, serving as a prelude to King Push. It was released on December 18, 2015 and received favorable reception from critics, and reached at number 20 on the Billboard 200. The album was executive produced by one of Pusha T's inspirations, Puff Daddy as well as manager Steven Victor. Darkest Before Dawn reached over 17 million streams in its first week. On May 31, 2016, Pusha T released the lead single from his upcoming King Push album, "Drug Dealers Anonymous" featuring Jay-Z, initially exclusively through Jay-Z's streaming service Tidal.In a June 2016 interview, former record executive Steve Stoute claimed that Pusha T had allegedly written the McDonald's "I'm lovin' it" jingle. Thornton later confirmed the news on Twitter. However, this claim has been disputed by advertising executives who created the campaign, and a McDonald's marketing executive. Neither Stoute nor Pusha T have commented on the dispute.In 2017, he collaborated once again with Linkin Park on the song "Good Goodbye" of the band's seventh studio album One More Light. In the same year, Pusha T collaborated with the virtual band Gorillaz on the song "Let Me Out" from their studio album Humanz.


=== 2018–2022: Daytona and It's Almost Dry ===

On April 19, 2018, Kanye West announced on his Twitter page that Pusha T's King Push album would be released on May 25, 2018. On May 23, 2018, Pusha T announced on his Twitter page that he changed the album title from King Push to Daytona. The album garnered controversy when West spent $85,000 to acquire the cover art: a photo of Whitney Houston's drug-filled bathroom, taken in her Atlanta, Georgia residence in 2006. Not only did the content of the album cover cause outside controversy, but Pusha T claims to not have agreed with the price West paid for the photo.  On May 25, 2018, Daytona released to critical acclaim. It received an 86 on Metacritic, indicating "universal acclaim". Subsequently, he was named the "Best Rapper Alive" by Complex for 2018 for his work on Daytona and his diss track "The Story of Adidon". The album received praise from hip-hop veterans Nas and P. Diddy, calling it "a classic album" and "a modern day masterpiece".In February 2020, Pusha T started a new record label, Heir Wave Media Group, to sign and develop artists from the Virginia area. He remained the president of G.O.O.D. Music while focusing on building a roster of artists from his home state. In creating the label, Pusha cited his desire to recruit "album artists" who craft narratives and larger stories throughout their projects. Local artists were encouraged to submit music to the Heir Wave Music YouTube channel and a weekly radio show on a local station, 103 Jamz FM. In the label's first year, Heir Wave Music signed Kahri 1k, Shaolinn, Leeto, and WhyNotDuce.On February 7, 2022, Pusha T released "Diet Coke", the lead single from his fourth studio album It's Almost Dry, which was produced by Kanye West and 88-Keys. The music video for the single was released the next day, directed by Omar Jones, and features Pusha T and West moving around over a white backdrop, which pays direct homage to Craig Mack's Flava in Ya Ear (Remix)" music video. 88-Keys later revealed that the beat for the single was made 18 years before the song was made, on a beat tape named The Makings of Crack Cocaine.On March 4, Pusha T and Nigo released the single "Hear Me Clearly" for Nigo's album I Know Nigo!, the song is also set to appear on It's Almost Dry. He also appeared alongside his brother No Malice as Clipse on the song "Punch Bowl" on the I Know Nigo! album as well. The music video also for "Hear Me Clearly" released on March 30. On that same month on the 21st, Pusha T appeared in a commercial for fast food chain Arby's, with a diss track named "Spicy Fish Diss" aimed at fellow fast food chain McDonald's because of their Fillet-O-Fish sandwich, and states that Arby's' Fish Sandwich is better. This was revenge toward the company for not crediting him for helping popularize the "I'm lovin' it" advertising campaign.On April 6, Pusha T released the third single for It's Almost Dry, "Neck & Wrist" featuring rapper Jay-Z and Pharrell, and would later appear in an interview with Charlamagne tha God, which released on the 11th. On the 18th, Pusha T announced the release date of It's Almost Dry as April 22, and also announced a listening party in New York City named "Cokechella".The much-delayed album, primarily produced by frequent collaborators Pharrell Williams and Kanye West, was released on April 22 to widespread critical acclaim. On the week dated May 7, 2022, it debuted atop the Billboard 200 with a total of 55,000 album equivalent units, becoming Pusha T's first number-one album on the chart.


=== 2022-present: Heir Wave Music Group and departure from GOOD Music ===
In December 2022, Pusha T announced his departure from GOOD Music after founder Kanye West's antisemitic and pro-race remarks. Speaking on West's support for "White Lives Matter", his 2024 presidential campaign and other public outbursts, Pusha T stated that they were nothing to "tap dance around". His departure also ended his tenure as the label's president. Shortly after, he changed his focus on his own label, Heir Wave Music Group. During an interview with Complex, Pusha T stated: "I have a particular need to build out Heir Wave as a platform and build out a circuit for artists within this region, simply because I feel like it's something that we've never had." He further added: "[the label] was made in the spirit of an “album artist”—artists who have a story to tell. They have a background for the fan who wants to be fully invested in that particular artist, their whole movement, and everything about them. That’s how we’re picking artists. It’s about authenticity. It’s about pure music, whatever type of music it is. It must be pure."
Pusha T performed at the 22nd Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival in April 2023.


== Feuds ==


=== Consequence ===
After Pusha T released "My God", the first single from his solo mixtape, his former GOOD Music label-mate Consequence took to Twitter and claimed Pusha T stole his flow and lyrics from a song of his that Pusha T was supposed to appear on, titled "The Last Supper". On July 22, 2011, Consequence released a song titled "The Plagiarist Society" where he takes shots and questions Pusha T's coke-dealing raps. Towards the end of the record, the Queens native promises to take aim at Kanye West next saying "You're nothing but a body shield, for that coward from the mid-west/ so yes you can bet, that your boss is next".
Pusha T responded to the diss track when he appeared on Chicago's 107.5 WGCI's The Morning Riot and said nobody is looking for Consequence, as for if he would respond on a record, Pusha T went on to say "At the end of the day I am an artist and this whole rap thing is fun to me, so I can't say you won't hear nothing, but to go back and forth with him, it's not right, I won't get anything out of it." Later that day, Consequence called into Chicago's WGCI's The Morning Riot in retaliation to the remarks Pusha T made about him. He also premiered a song titled "Everybody Told Me 2 (Straighten It Out)" where he disses West, Pusha T and GOOD Music in general. Since then Pusha T has responded to Consequence on a record. The song was the remix to Ace Hood's "Go 'N' Get It" which also featured Beanie Sigel, Busta Rhymes and Styles P. In the song Pusha raps "Consequence, nigga, talk is cheap You don't want a problem? Off the beef Before I off his ass with his awful teeth". On August 19, Consequence released Movies on Demand 3 and continued to diss his former label and Pusha T on songs such as "Career Killer" and "Mr.RapFix (Hot Water)".
On September 15, 2011, Consequence appeared on MTV's Rap Fix and announced his feud with Kanye West and GOOD Music was over. While out in Chicago in October 2011, Pusha T appeared on WGCI radio for a second time, and confirmed that the "beef" was indeed over, that it had died out and they have moved on. In January 2015, the two officially ended the feud when Consequence took to his Instagram page to let the people know: "All G.O.O.D. in 2015, Pusha [T] and I deaded everything and we creatively vibed with Kanye for this new LP."


=== Lil Wayne ===
The tension between Pusha T and rapper Lil Wayne had been going on for years, beginning soon after Clipse and Birdman worked on "What Happened to That Boy", the latter's 2002 single. In 2006, Wayne felt the Clipse song "Mr. Me Too" was directed at him, and in 2012 Pusha T's "Exodus 23:1" song caused Lil Wayne to vent on Twitter, later releasing a diss track titled "Goulish", in which he says "Fuck Pusha T and anybody that love him / His head up his ass, I'mma have to head-butt him". Pusha T has called Wayne's diss track "horrible" and said he felt it did not deserve a response. Both men have downplayed the feud, with Wayne saying he is over it. However, in September 2012, Pusha T appeared on the remix of Chief Keef's I Don't Like, where he accused Wayne of using ghostwriters saying, "My pen's better, you don't write, trendsetter, you clone-like", he has since confirmed that the line was a Wayne diss. In late November 2012, Pusha T once again dissed Wayne and Birdman on a Ludacris song titled "Mad Fo" from his #IDGAF mixtape. Pusha T later revealed his motivation for the verse: "Oh because it's a Swizz beat. You got to blame Swizz. See, when Wayne got a Swizz beat... with the "Ghoulish" track; he got busy, well he tried to."


=== Drake ===

After the release of Pusha T's song "Exodus 23:1" in 2012, Drake seemingly responded to Pusha on the intro to his 2013 album Nothing Was the Same, calling Pusha T a "bench player acting like a starter". The two directed subliminal disses towards each other between 2012 and 2017 with Pusha T rapping on the song "H.G.T.V", "It's too far gone when the realest ain't real / I walk amongst the clouds, so your ceilings ain't real/ These niggas Call of Duty 'cause they killings ain't real / With a questionable pen so the feeling ain't real," with Drake later responding on the diss track "Two Birds, One Stone" questioning Pusha T's drug dealing past.Pusha T further escalated the feud on the song "Infrared" from his 2018 album Daytona, where he accused Drake of using a ghostwriter. Drake responded to the song less than one day later, releasing a track titled "Duppy Freestyle" where he insults both Pusha T and Kanye West, accusing Pusha of being a fake drug dealer and claiming that he would boost sales of Pusha T's album just by dissing him. Pusha T responded to Duppy on May 29, 2018, with the track "The Story of Adidon" which featured Pusha responding to Drake over the instrumental of Jay-Z's 2017 single "The Story of O.J." The song debuted on Hot 97 and has lines directed towards rumors Drake has an illegitimate child and his producer's multiple sclerosis. The song additionally referenced Pusha's ongoing beef with Lil Wayne and Birdman.  The song's cover art also attracted controversy, showing an unedited picture of Drake wearing a Jim Crow t-shirt and hoodie and blackface makeup. Drake eventually admitted to losing the feud in an interview with RapRadar, saying it was his "first loss in the competitive sport of rapping."


== Personal life ==
On June 11, 2020, Pusha T and his wife Virginia Williams welcomed their first child, Nigel Brixx Thornton. The child's name attracted reactions online for "Brixx" being an apparent slang term for cocaine, something which Pusha T raps about often.In November 2021, Pusha T's mother died as did his father four months later.


== Discography ==

Studio albums

My Name Is My Name (2013)
King Push – Darkest Before Dawn: The Prelude (2015)
Daytona  (2018)
It's Almost Dry (2022)


== Awards and nominations ==
Grammy Awards


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website 
Pusha T at AllMusic
Pusha T at IMDbKamaal Ibn John Fareed (born Jonathan William Davis, April 10, 1970), better known by his stage name Q-Tip, is an American rapper, record producer, singer, and DJ. Nicknamed the Abstract, he is noted for his innovative jazz-influenced style of hip hop production and his philosophical, esoteric and introspective lyrical themes. He embarked on his music career in the late 1980s, as an MC and main producer of the influential alternative hip hop group A Tribe Called Quest. In the mid-1990s, he co-founded the production team The Ummah, followed by the release of his gold-certified solo debut Amplified in 1999. In the following decade, he released the Grammy Award-nominated album The Renaissance (2008) and the experimental album Kamaal the Abstract (2009).
As an actor, Q-Tip has appeared in various films such as Poetic Justice, She Hate Me, and Prison Song, the latter of which he co-wrote and played the lead role. As a DJ, he has hosted the Apple Music 1/Apple Music Hits radio show Abstract Radio since 2015. In 2016, Q-Tip was named the artistic director for hip hop culture at the Kennedy Center, and in 2018, he became the instructor of a jazz and hip hop course at New York University's Clive Davis Institute of Recorded Music.
Q-Tip is one of the most acclaimed figures in hip hop. AllMusic states that he "led a jazz-based hip-hop revolution during the '90s", calling him "the best rapper/producer in hip-hop history". About.com placed him #17 on their list of the Top 25 Hip-Hop Producers, and #38 on their list of the 50 Greatest Rappers of All Time. In 2012, The Source ranked him #20 on their list of the Top 50 Lyricists of All Time.


== Early life ==
Q-Tip was born Jonathan William Davis on April 10, 1970, in Harlem, New York City. His father, Jonathan Davis II, emigrated from the Caribbean island of Montserrat and was raised in Cleveland. His mother is an African American from Alabama. When he was a child, his family settled in St. Albans, Queens, New York City. He first met his friend Phife Dawg at church when they were both two years old. At age nine, he began rapping after being encouraged by Phife Dawg; shortly before that, they both heard "Rapper's Delight" by The Sugarhill Gang for the first time. He was also inspired by his father's extensive jazz record collection, and at age 12, he began to DJ and make pause tape beats.Q-Tip attended Murry Bergtraum High School in Manhattan, where he first befriended Ali Shaheed Muhammad, Afrika Baby Bam and Mike Gee, with the latter two forming the hip-hop group Jungle Brothers. In high school, he participated in rap battles and went by the stage names J Nice and MC Love Child. In 1985, he and Muhammad formed an MC and DJ duo, and using recording equipment provided by Muhammad's uncle, they began making demos. They were later joined by Phife Dawg, who also rapped, and neighborhood friend Jarobi White; collectively, they were known as Quest.When Q-Tip was 16 years old, his father died of emphysema.


== Career ==


=== 1988–1993: Early success with A Tribe Called Quest ===
Afrika Baby Bam gave him the nickname "Q-Tip", which became popular in high school, eventually becoming his stage name. In 1988, Q-Tip was featured on Jungle Brothers' songs "The Promo", which he helped produce, and "Black Is Black", in which he renamed his group A Tribe Called Quest, a name that was given by Afrika Baby Bam. Both songs appeared on Jungle Brothers' debut album Straight out the Jungle. That year, the two groups met the like-minded group De La Soul, with the three groups forming the core of the Native Tongues collective, known for their Afrocentrism, positivity and eclectic sampling.In 1989, A Tribe Called Quest signed with Jive Records after being rejected by several labels, due to their unconventional image and sound. After recording several demos, they began working on their debut album, with Q-Tip serving as the group's main producer. During this period, Q-Tip began using the E-mu SP-1200 and Akai S950 samplers. The album, People's Instinctive Travels and the Paths of Rhythm, was released in early 1990 and established Q-Tip as a highly skilled lyricist. Later that year, he made a guest appearance on the house single "Groove Is in the Heart" by Deee-Lite, which became a worldwide hit.In 1991, A Tribe Called Quest released their second album The Low End Theory. Wanting the group to "step it up in general", Q-Tip encouraged Phife Dawg, who had recently become diabetic, to stay with the group and increase his participation. The result was the "smoothest" rapping "of any rap record ever heard", due to the duo's strong chemistry. The group also garnered acclaim for Q-Tip's jazzy minimalist production.The following year, Q-Tip was involved in a fight with new jack swing group Wreckx-n-Effect, over Phife Dawg's lyrics on the single "Jazz (We've Got)". As a result, it is believed that the ski mask that Q-Tip wore, in A Tribe Called Quest's video for the single "Hot Sex", was covering up his injuries.By 1993, Q-Tip became known for his outside production work, producing the hit single "Gangsta Bitch" by Apache, among other songs. The song's chorus was performed by Tupac Shakur in the film Poetic Justice, in which Q-Tip made his acting debut as Janet Jackson's love interest. Later that year, A Tribe Called Quest released their third album Midnight Marauders, which was hailed as the group's most complete work. Along with his "practically telepathic" lyrical interplay with Phife Dawg, the album introduced Q-Tip's gritty style of production.


=== 1994–1995: Production work and formation of the Ummah ===
After two critically acclaimed platinum-selling albums with his group, Q-Tip began focusing on outside production. In 1994, he produced the single "One Love" from Nas's debut album Illmatic and performed the song's chorus. He also remixed the Nas single "The World Is Yours", as well as Craig Mack's single "Get Down", in which he contributed a guest verse. He made an additional guest appearance on the song "Get It Together" by Beastie Boys, from their album Ill Communication.Film director Spike Lee asked Q-Tip to produce the single "Crooklyn" for the soundtrack to his 1994 film of the same name. Q-Tip helped Lee recruit three Brooklyn MCs for the song: Special Ed, Masta Ace and Buckshot, who formed the group Crooklyn Dodgers.During that year's Lollapalooza, keyboardist Amp Fiddler introduced Q-Tip to young Detroit producer Jay Dee, who gave Q-Tip a demo tape of his group Slum Village. After being impressed by Jay Dee's beats, Q-Tip suggested that the two should work together. By 1995, Q-Tip, Jay Dee and Muhammad formed a production team, known as The Ummah, in which each member produced songs individually and received a songwriting credit for their work. He and Muhammad also created a label, Museum Music, with Vinia Mojica becoming their first artist.Queens duo Mobb Deep, whom Q-Tip discovered in the early 1990s, enlisted him as a mixing engineer and producer for their 1995 album The Infamous. He also contributed a verse to the song "Drink Away the Pain (Situations)".


=== 1996–1998: Declining group chemistry to breakup ===
In 1996, The Ummah's production first appeared on Busta Rhymes's debut album The Coming, with Q-Tip producing and rapping on the song "Ill Vibe", while Jay Dee produced the other two Ummah productions on the album. That summer, A Tribe Called Quest released their fourth album Beats, Rhymes and Life, which was produced by The Ummah. Although Q-Tip was involved in the album's production, he considered the album a "showcase" for Jay Dee, who produced both of the singles, "1nce Again" and "Stressed Out", along with three other songs. Q-Tip also added his younger cousin Consequence as a guest rapper on six songs. Much of the album's lyrical themes were inspired by Q-Tip's recent conversion to Islam, however, his relationship with Phife Dawg became strained, negatively affecting their lyrical chemistry. Q-Tip also became an A&R for Motown Records and signed Consequence to Museum Music.The following year, he made a guest appearance on Janet Jackson's single "Got 'til It's Gone" and co-produced Mariah Carey's single "Honey", both of which became worldwide hits. In early 1998, a fire occurred at Q-Tip's home recording studio, completely destroying it; among the items destroyed in the blaze were his entire record collection, consisting of nearly 20,000 vinyl records, and a computer containing many unreleased songs. The fire delayed the release of A Tribe Called Quest's fifth album, The Love Movement, pushing the release date from May to September of that year. Produced by The Ummah, the album explored the lyrical theme of love, however, A Tribe Called Quest disbanded a month before the album's release.


=== 1999–2000: Amplified and solo success ===
After the breakup of his group, Q-Tip began pursuing a solo career in 1999. He collaborated with R&B singer Raphael Saadiq and released the hit single "Get Involved". Later that year, he signed with Arista Records and released his solo debut Amplified, which he produced with Jay Dee. The album was promoted by the hit singles "Vivrant Thing" and "Breathe and Stop", which were more pop-oriented than his previous work with A Tribe Called Quest. However, other songs on the album maintained the ethos of the group and it received mostly positive reviews from critics. In January 2000, it was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America and "Vivrant Thing" was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Rap Solo Performance, presented a month later at the 42nd Grammy Awards.Q-Tip described his house fire as "symbolic", because he was left with no records to sample, but still had the desire to make music. In late 1999, he began seeking musicians for a live band, taking drum lessons from Omar Hakim, studying bel canto, and taking piano lessons from Weldon Irvine, whom he sampled for A Tribe Called Quest's "Award Tour" single. He also became a member of the Soulquarians collective during this period.


=== 2001–2007: Label issues and collaborations ===
In 2001, Q-Tip starred in the film Prison Song, which he co-wrote with the film's director, Darnell Martin. He also contributed to the film score, producing four songs. That year, he completed his follow-up album Kamaal the Abstract, which was recorded with a live band and featured Q-Tip singing the majority of its songs. Originally slated for release in October 2001, the release date was pushed to April 2002, before Arista record executives decided not to release it, doubting its commercial potential. Q-Tip explained his label situation during this period:

Well, after I put out Amplified, I was talking to Clive Davis [at Arista] about doing this album with the band. I started recording an album, which went on to become Kamaal the Abstract. And Clive's regime was up [in 2000], and [Def Jam heads] Lyor Cohen and Russell [Simmons] told me I should stay at Arista. So I did that, and I gave [the album] to L.A. Reid, who wound up taking over. And he heard the album, really liked it, whatever. We started servicing it to press — and then he just got cold feet about it. He was saying it was really left for him or something. So I then got a release from Arista, and I went over to DreamWorks and recorded an album called Open. And then DreamWorks got bought out [in 2003], so the whole label fell apart. Then I wound up on Interscope for like a month or two. I had like one conversation with Jimmy Iovine. It was a good conversation. And then I wound up at Geffen for like a year and a half.
During this period, between album releases, Q-Tip recorded about 500 songs, about 300 of which were instrumentals. His 2002 guest appearance on Large Professor's song "In the Sun" earned him "Rhyme of the Month" in The Source. In 2003, he co-produced Heartcore, an album by jazz guitarist Kurt Rosenwinkel. In 2005, he released the single "For the Nasty" on the Motown label, featuring Busta Rhymes, and was featured on The Chemical Brothers' hit single "Galvanize", from their album Push the Button. The following year, "Galvanize" won the Grammy Award for Best Dance Recording, earning Q-Tip his first Grammy Award.Jay Dee, who later went by the name J Dilla, died of the blood disease TTP in February 2006, with Q-Tip serving as a pallbearer at his funeral. The two had planned to work on a collaborative album, Buddy Lee, before his death. That year, A Tribe Called Quest reunited for a tour across North America. In 2007, Q-Tip signed with Universal Motown Records and released the single "Work It Out".


=== 2008–2009: The Renaissance and Kamaal the Abstract ===
His second official album The Renaissance was released in late 2008, through Universal Motown, and included reworked songs from his shelved Open album. It spawned the singles "Gettin' Up" and "Move", which was produced by J Dilla. The album garnered widespread acclaim from critics, who praised it as a return to his A Tribe Called Quest roots. It became his highest-charting album on the Billboard 200, at number 11, and was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Rap Album, presented at the 52nd Grammy Awards in 2010.After being shelved for seven years, Kamaal the Abstract was finally released in September 2009, through Battery Records. The album received mostly positive reviews from critics, including reviews from its initial press run in 2002.


=== 2010–2016: Production work and final group album ===
Q-Tip was among a group of producers who were brought to work on Kanye West's 2010 album, My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy. In 2011, his production eventually appeared on West and Jay-Z's collaborative album Watch the Throne, contributing to the songs "Lift Off" and "That's My Bitch". The following year, Q-Tip signed to West's GOOD Music label, through Def Jam, and prepared the release of his new album, The Last Zulu.In 2013, Q-Tip announced that A Tribe Called Quest would perform their last show, as an opening act for West's Yeezus Tour, and the following year, he produced the song "Meteorite" for Mariah Carey and co-wrote "Ain't That Easy" and "Sugah Daddy" from D'Angelo's Black Messiah album. However, in 2015, the group performed live on The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon to commemorate the 25th anniversary of People's Instinctive Travels and the Paths of Rhythm. That year, Q-Tip began hosting the radio show Abstract Radio on Apple Music 1, explaining that his intent was "rather than just follow any sort of current, what's popular...to try [instead] to figure out how to bridge many gaps and bring it all into one singular voice of good music."In March 2016, Q-Tip was appointed as the Kennedy Center's first artistic director for hip-hop culture, curating a series of hip-hop programs for the performing arts center. Later that month, Phife Dawg died of complications relating to diabetes. That October, Q-Tip revealed that A Tribe Called Quest secretly began working on a new album shortly after their Tonight Show appearance, completing the album after Phife Dawg's death. The following month, the group released their final album, We Got It from Here... Thank You 4 Your Service, which received widespread acclaim from critics.


=== 2017–present: The Last Zulu, AlGoRhythms, and Riotdiaries ===
In 2018, he recorded a cover version of Elton John and Kiki Dee's song "Don't Go Breaking My Heart" with Demi Lovato. He also announced that his delayed album The Last Zulu would be released soon. Later that year, he joined the faculty of New York University's Clive Davis Institute of Recorded Music, where he began teaching a course that explores the connection between jazz and hip hop. In an October 2018 interview, he claimed that he would never retire or cease production work, stating, "I will do this to my death."In 2019, Q-Tip revealed that he was working on three solo albums (The Last Zulu, AlGoRhythms, and Riotdiaries), as well as projects by Mary J. Blige and Danny Brown. He served as executive producer of Brown's album U Know What I'm Sayin?, released in October 2019. Later that year, he also appeared on the song "Hit Man" from Gang Starr's album One of the Best Yet. 
Q-Tip performed the chorus on the song "Yah Yah" from Eminem's 2020 album, Music to Be Murdered By.  He also performed the chorus on the track "More Life", which he co-produced, from Cordae's 2021 EP, Just Until... Q-Tip is the producer of LL Cool J's upcoming solo album.Jack White's 2022 album Fear of the Dawn features Q-Tip on the single "Hi-De-Ho".


== Musical style ==


=== Production ===
As a producer, Q-Tip is a self-proclaimed "perfectionist-at-work" and is known for his innovative and experimental production, which "led a jazz-based hip-hop revolution during the '90s". In particular, he is noted for his ability to layer programmed drums, giving the drums a grittier sound; his unconventional use of three-bar loops; and his frequent use of rests (or "space"), which was inspired by Miles Davis.Pharrell Williams has stated that Q-Tip "picks the best loops  ... he'd pick like the illest chord, bassline and all that." Williams asserted that "we're all [Q-Tip's] sons", referring to himself, J Dilla and Kanye West, further stating that "we wouldn't be here man, if it wasn't for Tribe albums." 9th Wonder credits him for starting the trend of jazz sampling in hip hop:

Q-Tip started the whole idea of "Okay, we beat up every James Brown record that we could. We exasperated every P-Funk record that we could." So Q-Tip took the idea of "some of this Cal Tjader record" or "what's up with Lou Donaldson?" or "What's up with Cannonball [Adderley]?" or "What's up with Grant Green?" or "What's up with Grover Washington? Why are we not using those?"
Q-Tip's recent production is a mix of live instrumentation and sampled music. Two decades after his house fire, he has since rebuilt his record collection; as of 2016, it consists of about 9,000 vinyl records.


=== Lyricism and rapping technique ===
As an MC, Q-Tip is noted for his philosophical, esoteric and introspective lyricism, often putting socially conscious messages in his lyrics. He writes his lyrics to the beat, allowing the music to help serve as inspiration for his songwriting. Q-Tip's flow is commonly described as "mellow" and "smooth". When rapping, he treats his voice "like an instrument" in the music and is noted for his "flexible" rhyme schemes.


== Personal life ==
Q-Tip converted to Islam in the mid-1990s, changing his name to Kamaal Ibn John Fareed. He also follows a vegetarian diet and practices Transcendental Meditation.He has been romantically linked to Janet Jackson, Mariah Carey, Angie Martinez and Nicole Kidman. He is also a longtime friend of actor Leonardo DiCaprio and comedian Dave Chappelle.According to a DNA analysis he took in 2012, Q-Tip is descended, mainly, from the Jola people of Guinea-Bissau.In recent years, he has lived in Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey and in nearby Edgewater.


== Discography ==

Studio albumsAmplified (Arista, 1999)
The Renaissance (Universal Motown, 2008)
Kamaal the Abstract (Battery, 2009)
The Last Zulu (TBA)
AlGoRhythms (TBA)
Riotdiaries (TBA)with A Tribe Called QuestPeople's Instinctive Travels and the Paths of Rhythm (Jive, 1990)
The Low End Theory (Jive, 1991)
Midnight Marauders (Jive, 1993)
Beats, Rhymes and Life (Jive, 1996)
The Love Movement (Jive, 1998)
We Got It from Here... Thank You 4 Your Service (Epic, 2016)


== Filmography ==


=== Films ===


=== Television ===


== Awards and nominations ==


=== BET Hip Hop Awards ===


=== Grammy Awards ===


=== MTV Video Music Awards ===


=== Soul Train Music Awards ===


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Coleman, Brian (2007). Check the Technique. Random House. ISBN 978-0-8129-7775-2.
Edwards, Paul (2009). How to Rap. Chicago Review Press. ISBN 978-1-55652-816-3.


== External links ==

Q-Tip discography at Discogs
Q-Tip at IMDb
Official A Tribe Called Quest WebsiteDana Elaine Owens (born March 18, 1970), better known by the stage name Queen Latifah, is an American actress, rapper and singer. She has received various accolades, including a Grammy Award, a Primetime Emmy Award, a Golden Globe Award, three Screen Actors Guild Awards, and two NAACP Image Awards, in addition to a nomination for an Academy Award. In 2006, she became the first hip hop artist to receive a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame.
At age 19, Latifah released her debut album All Hail the Queen (1989), featuring the hit single "Ladies First". Her second album Nature of a Sista' (1991), was produced by Tommy Boy Records. Her third album, Black Reign (1993), became the first album by a solo female rapper to receive a gold certification from the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA), and spawned the single "U.N.I.T.Y.", which was influential in raising awareness of violence against women and the objectification of Black female sexuality. The track reached the top 40 on the Billboard Hot 100, and won a Grammy Award. Her fourth album Order in the Court (1998), was released with Motown Records. She has since released the albums The Dana Owens Album (2004), Trav'lin' Light (2007), and Persona (2009). 
Latifah starred as Khadijah James on the Fox sitcom Living Single from 1993 to 1998 and landed a leading role in the action film Set It Off (1996). She created the daytime talk show The Queen Latifah Show, which ran from 1999 to 2001, and again from 2013 to 2015, in syndication. Her portrayal of Matron "Mama" Morton in the musical film Chicago (2002), receiving a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress. She has also starred or co-starred in the films Bringing Down the House (2003), Taxi (2004), Barbershop 2: Back in Business (2005), Beauty Shop (2005), Last Holiday (2006), Hairspray (2007), Joyful Noise (2012), 22 Jump Street (2014), and Girls Trip (2017); and provided voice work in the Ice Age film series.Latifah received critical acclaim for her portrayal of blues singer Bessie Smith in the HBO film Bessie (2015), which she co-produced, winning the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Television Movie. From 2016 to 2019, she starred as Carlotta Brown in the musical drama series Star. In 2020, she portrayed Hattie McDaniel in the miniseries Hollywood. Since 2021, she has held the lead role on CBS's revival of the action drama The Equalizer.


== Early life ==
Dana Elaine Owens was born in Newark, New Jersey, on March 18, 1970, and lived primarily in East Orange, New Jersey. She is the daughter of Rita Lamae (née Bray; d. 2018), a teacher at Irvington High School (Dana's alma mater), and Lancelot Amos Owens, a police officer.  Her parents divorced when she was ten.She was raised in the Baptist faith. She attended Catholic school in Newark, New Jersey and Essex Catholic Girls' High School in Irvington but graduated from Irvington High School.  After high school, she attended classes at Borough of Manhattan Community College.She found her stage name, Latifah (لطيفة laţīfa), meaning "delicate" and "very kind" in Arabic, in a book of Arabic names when she was eight. Always tall, the 5-foot-10-inch (1.78 m) Dana was a power forward on her high school basketball team. She performed the number "Home" from the musical The Wiz in a grammar school play.


== Music career ==


=== 1988–1989: Career beginnings ===
She began beat boxing for the hip-hop group Ladies Fresh and was an original member of the Flavor Unit, which, at that time, was a crew of MCs grouped around producer DJ King Gemini, who made a demo recording of Queen Latifah's rap Princess of the Posse. He gave the recording to Fab 5 Freddy, the host of Yo! MTV Raps. The song got the attention of Tommy Boy Music employee Dante Ross, who signed Latifah and in 1989 released  her first single, "Wrath of My Madness". More recent artists, like Ice Cube and Lil' Kim, would go on to sample Latifah's track in their songs, "Wrath of Kim's Madness" and "You Can't Play With My Yo-Yo" in later years. Latifah has a two-octave vocal range. She is considered a contralto, having the ability to both rap and sing.


=== 1989–2002: Rap and hip-hop ===
Latifah made her mark in hip-hop by rapping about the issues surrounding a black woman. Her songs had covered topics including domestic violence, harassment on the streets, and relationship problems.
Freddy helped Latifah sign with Tommy Boy Records, which released Latifah's first album All Hail the Queen in 1989, when she was nineteen. That year, she appeared as Referee on the UK label Music of Life album 1989 – The Hustlers Convention (live). She received a Candace Award from the National Coalition of 100 Black Women in 1992. The single "Ladies First" featuring Monie Love became the first collaborative track by two female rappers not in a group. In 1993, she released the album Black Reign, which was certified Gold in the United States and produced the Grammy Award-winning song "U.N.I.T.Y." In 1998, co-produced by Ro Smith, now CEO of Def Ro Inc., she released her fourth hip-hop album Order in the Court, which was released by Motown Records. Latifah was also a member of the hip-hop collective Native Tongues.
Latifah performed in the Super Bowl XXXII halftime show, making her the first rapper to do so.


=== 2003–2009: Change to traditional singing ===
After Order in the Court, Latifah shifted primarily to singing soul music and jazz standards, which she had used sparingly in her previous hip-hop-oriented records. In 2004, she released the soul/jazz standards The Dana Owens Album. On July 11, 2007, Latifah sang at the famed Hollywood Bowl in Los Angeles as the headlining act in a live jazz concert. In front of a crowd of more than 12,400, she was backed by a 10-piece live orchestra and three backup vocalists, which was billed as the Queen Latifah Orchestra. Latifah performed new arrangements of standards including "California Dreaming", first made popular by 1960s icons the Mamas & the Papas. Later in 2007, Latifah released an album titled Trav'lin' Light. Jill Scott, Erykah Badu, Joe Sample, George Duke, Christian McBride, and Stevie Wonder made guest appearances. The album was nominated for a Grammy in the "Best Traditional Pop Vocal Album" category.In 2009, Latifah, along with the NJPAC Jubilation Choir, recorded the title track on the album Oh, Happy Day: An All-Star Music Celebration, covering the song that the Edwin Hawkins Singers made popular in 1969.


=== 2008–present: Return to hip-hop ===
In 2008, Latifah was asked if she would make another hip-hop album. She was quoted stating that the album was done already and it would be called All Hail the Queen II. The following year, in 2009, she released her album Persona. The song "Cue the Rain" was released as the album's lead single. 2011 saw Queen Latifah sing "Who Can I Turn To" in a duet with Tony Bennett for his album Duets II. In January 2012, while appearing on 106 & Park with Dolly Parton, to promote Joyful Noise, Latifah stated that she had been working on a new album.


== Film and television ==


=== 1991–2001: Early career ===
She began her film career by having supporting roles in the 1991 and 1992 films House Party 2, Juice and Jungle Fever. Moreover, she has guest starred in two episodes during the second season (1991–1992) of the NBC hit The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air and had a guest role as herself on a tv sitcom Hangin' with Mr. Cooper in 1993. From 1993 to 1998, Latifah had a starring role on Living Single, the FOX sitcom, which gained high ratings among black audiences; she also wrote and performed its theme song. Her mother Rita played her mother on-screen. Latifah appeared in the 1996 box-office hit, Set It Off, and had a supporting role in the Holly Hunter film Living Out Loud (1998). She played the role of Thelma in the 1999 movie The Bone Collector, alongside Denzel Washington and Angelina Jolie. She also had her own talk show, The Queen Latifah Show, from 1999 to 2001 and revamped in 2013. On January 6, 2014, The Queen Latifah Show was renewed for a second season. However, on November 21, 2014, Sony Pictures Television canceled Latifah's show due to declining ratings. Production of the series closed down, taking effect on December 18, 2014, leaving new episodes that were broadcast until March 6, 2015.


=== 2002–present: Mainstream success ===
Although Latifah had previously received some critical acclaim, she gained mainstream success after being cast as Matron "Mama" Morton in Chicago, a musical film that won the Academy Award for Best Picture. Latifah herself received the nomination for Best Supporting Actress for her role, but lost to co-star Catherine Zeta-Jones. Latifah is one of five hip-hop/R&B artists to receive an Academy Award nomination in an acting category. The others are Will Smith (Best Actor, Ali, 2001, and The Pursuit of Happyness, 2006), Jennifer Hudson (Best Supporting Actress, Dreamgirls, 2007), Jamie Foxx, (Best Actor, Ray, and Best Supporting Actor Collateral, both in 2004, also winning the first) and Mary J. Blige (Best Supporting Actress, Mudbound, 2017).
In 2003, she starred with Steve Martin in the film Bringing Down the House, which was a major success at the box office. She also recorded a song "Do Your Thing" for the soundtrack. Since then, she has had both leading and supporting roles in a multitude of films that received varied critical and box office receptions, including films such as Scary Movie 3, Barbershop 2: Back in Business, Taxi, Kung Faux, Beauty Shop, and Hairspray. In early 2006, Latifah appeared in a romantic comedy/drama entitled Last Holiday. Film critic Richard Roeper stated that "this is the Queen Latifah performance I've been waiting for ever since she broke into movies". Also in 2006, Latifah voiced Ellie, a friendly mammoth, in the animated film, Ice Age: The Meltdown (her first voice appearance in an animated film), and appeared in the drama Stranger Than Fiction.
The summer of 2007 brought Latifah triple success in the big-screen version of the Broadway smash hit Hairspray, in which she acted, sang, and danced. The film rated highly with critics. It starred, among others, John Travolta, Michelle Pfeiffer, Allison Janney, James Marsden, Christopher Walken, and Zac Efron. Also in 2007, she portrayed an HIV-positive woman in the film Life Support, a role for which she garnered her first Golden Globe Award, Screen Actors Guild Award and an Emmy nomination. For her work, Queen Latifah received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame, on January 4, 2006, located at 6915 Hollywood Blvd.

Queen Latifah produced the 2007 film The Perfect Holiday. In addition to producing the film, Latifah starred alongside Terrence Howard, Morris Chestnut, Gabrielle Union, Charles Q. Murphy, Jill Marie Jones, and Faizon Love. In 2008, Latifah appeared in the crime comedy Mad Money opposite Academy Award–winner Diane Keaton as well as Katie Holmes and Ted Danson. She appeared on Saturday Night Live on October 4, 2008, as moderator Gwen Ifill in a comedic sketch depicting the vice-presidential debate between then-Senator Joe Biden and then-Governor Sarah Palin and played in The Secret Life of Bees. In 2009, Latifah was a presenter at the 81st Academy Awards, presenting the segment honoring film professionals who had died during 2008 and singing "I'll Be Seeing You" during the montage. Latifah spoke at Michael Jackson's memorial service in Los Angeles. She also hosted the 2010 People's Choice Awards. Latifah sang "America the Beautiful" at Super Bowl XLIV hosted in Miami, Florida, on February 7, 2010, with Carrie Underwood. Latifah hosted the 2010 BET Awards on June 27, 2010. She starred with Dolly Parton in Joyful Noise (2012). In June 2011, Latifah received an honorary doctorate degree in Humane Letters from Delaware State University in Dover, Delaware. On September 16, 2013, Latifah premiered her own syndicated daytime television show titled The Queen Latifah Show. On January 26, 2014, Latifah officiated the weddings of 33 same-sex and opposite-sex couples during a performance of "Same Love" by Macklemore at the 56th Annual Grammy Awards. In 2015, Latifah received a Best Actress Emmy nomination for her lead role as Bessie Smith in Bessie, an HBO film which received a total of 12 Emmy nominations.On April 26, 2017, MTV announced that Latifah will be an executive producer for the third season of the slasher television series Scream. The show will undergo a reboot with a new cast and Brett Matthews serving as show runner. In addition, Matthews, Shakim Compere and Yaneley Arty will also be credited as executive producers for the series under Flavor Unit Entertainment. On June 24, 2019, it was confirmed that the third season is scheduled to premiere over three nights on VH1, starting from July 8, 2019. The third season titled Scream: Resurrection premiered on July 8, 2019.Latifah played the sea witch Ursula in The Little Mermaid Live!. Although the production itself was not well received, critics widely praised Latifah's performance, with The Hollywood Reporter calling her performance "the best moment of the evening".In 2021, CBS premiered the new active TV series, The Equalizer, a reboot of the 1980s detective series of the same name, starring Latifah in the lead role (renamed as Robyn for her version). More recently, she signed a deal with Audible.


== Artistry ==
Latifah's music usually contains hip-hop, jazz and gospel and has the elements of R&B, soul, and dance. She possesses a two-octave vocal range. Queen Latifah is a contralto, and she has the ability to rap and sing. Her biggest musical influences are EPMD, KRS-One, LL Cool J, Public Enemy, and Run–D.M.C. She also cites Bessie Smith as one of her influences.Al Hail the Queen features hip-hop, reggae, soulful back-up vocals, boppish scatting, snappy horn back-ups, and house music. She described the work as "a creative outlet... and sometimes it can become like a newspaper that people read with their ears."Early in her career, Queen Latifah's lyrics were described as woman-centered and Afrocentric. The rapper often used Afrocentric attires during public appearances and music videos, looks that became her trademark. In 1990, The New York Times' Michelle Wallace described her art as "politically sophisticated", which "seems worlds apart from the adolescent, buffoonish sex orientation of most rap." For AllMusic, her "strong, intelligent, no-nonsense" persona made her "arguably the first MC who could properly be described as feminist". Queen Latifah did not identify as a feminist at the time, and expressed that her music was not exclusive for the female audience. On the topic, author Tricia Rose wrote that Black female rappers likely did not identify with feminism during that time because it was perceived as a movement that focused primarily on white women's issues.


== Products and endorsements ==
Latifah is a celebrity spokesperson for CoverGirl cosmetics, Curvation women's underwear, Pizza Hut, and Jenny Craig. She represents her own line of cosmetics for women of color called the CoverGirl Queen Collection. Latifah has also launched a perfume line called "Queen" and "Queen of Hearts". On May 23, 2018, Latifah was named the godmother of Carnival Cruise Lines' vessel Carnival Horizon. Apart from singing, Queen Latifah has written a book on confidence and self-respect called Ladies First: Revelations of a Strong Woman.


== Personal life ==
Raised in East Orange, New Jersey, Latifah has been a resident of Colts Neck, New Jersey; Rumson, New Jersey; and Beverly Hills, California.Latifah's older brother, Lancelot Jr., was killed in 1992 in an accident involving a motorcycle that Latifah had purchased for him. A 2006 interview revealed that Latifah still wears the key to the motorcycle around her neck, visible throughout her performance in her sitcom Living Single. In 1995, Latifah was the victim of a carjacking, which also resulted in the shooting of her boyfriend, Sean Moon.In 1996, she was arrested and charged with possession of marijuana and possession of a loaded handgun. In 2002, she was arrested for driving under the influence in Los Angeles County. She was placed on three years' probation after being convicted.On March 21, 2018, her mother, actress Rita Owens, died due to heart failure, an issue she had been battling since 2004.Latifah long refused to address speculation around her sexuality and personal life, telling The New York Times in 2008 that "I don't feel like I need to share my personal life, and I don't care if people think I'm gay or not". At the BET Awards 2021, during her acceptance speech for the Lifetime Achievement Award, she publicly acknowledged her partner Eboni Nichols and son Rebel for the first time, ending the speech with "happy Pride!"In the January 2020 season 6, episode 4 of Finding Your Roots titled "This Land Is My Land", Latifah learned that her family were descended from a line of freed Negroes, since her ancestors were listed by name in the U.S. pre–Civil War census of 1860 in Virginia. Slaves were almost never listed by name in pre–U.S. Civil War censuses. Latifah also learned the exact date her ancestors became free which was October 1, 1792, the date her second earliest known ancestor, a woman named "Jug" or Juggy Owens, was emancipated from slavery.


=== Feud with Foxy Brown ===
Disagreements between Foxy Brown and Queen Latifah began in mid-1996, where media reports indicated that Brown was a prime target of Latifah's diss record "Name Callin'", which was featured on the Set It Off soundtrack. In response, Brown made allegations of Latifah "checking her out" at musical events and further questioned Latifah's sexuality in various public radio interviews. In 1998, Brown released a diss record titled "10% Dis", where she continually questioned Latifah's sexuality and accused her of being jealous.By late spring of 1998, Latifah responded to Brown through another diss record titled "Name Callin' Part II". On the record, Latifah disses Brown about her heavy reliance on sex appeal, in which she implies that Brown has to rely on skimpy outfits to hide her "half-assed flow". Foxy Brown retaliated via a response-diss record titled "Talk to Me", in which Brown made fun of the ratings of Latifah's television talk show and went on to make various homophobic remarks to both Latifah and then-newcomer Queen Pen.A significant part of media dubbed Latifah "the winner" of the feud. Hip-hop magazine Ego Trip stated that Latifah won the feud with her diss record "Name Callin' Part II" and added that she showed that "the lady's still first", in reference to Latifah's 1990 single, "Ladies First". In 2000, Brown and Latifah reconciled; to prove that the truce was real, Brown performed her song "Na Na Be Like" on The Queen Latifah Show.


== Legacy ==


=== Music ===
Often cited as one of the best female rappers, Queen Latifah achieved groundbreaking success in the late 1980s and early 1990s, and became what Pitchfork considered as the "most recognizable female rapper" of the golden era of hip hop. AllMusic writer Steve Huey stated that Latifah was "certainly not the first female rapper, but she was the first one to become a bona fide star." In the book Notable Black American Women, Jessie Carney Smith hailed her as "rap's first feminist" and "one of the few women to make a mark in the male-dominated field of rap music". Variety called her "one of the major forerunners for women in modern hip-hop," and The Guardian referred to her as a "pioneer of female rap".Throughout her career, several media publications have referred to her as the "Queen of Rap" including New York magazine (1990) via editor Dinitia Smith, as well as "Queen of Hip Hop". Latifah became the first solo female rapper to receive a RIAA certification for an album (Black Reign), a commercial breakthrough that the AllMusic editor considered as creating a path for "a talented crew of women rappers to make their own way onto the charts as the 90s progressed". Her breakthrough also helped place New Jersey on the hip hop map. In 1998, she performed in the Super Bowl XXXII halftime show, making her the first rapper to do so.According to an African American Review journal, her afrocentric feminist music video for "Ladies First" presented a "televisual moment" and disrupted the continuity of sexism and racism that dominated the music videos at the time. The song was listed on the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame's 500 Songs That Shaped Rock and Roll, and was one of the firsts texts to address the declining standards of male-female relationships in community life. Author Tricia Rose expressed that it "offered hip-hop for the development of pro-female pro-black diasporas political consciousness." In Consequence, Okla Jones noted that the song "U.N.I.T.Y."—which lyrics confront slurs against women in hip-hop culture and address other types of disrespect—created a path for future female rappers to be "their authentic selves".


=== Acting ===
Vibe magazine has noted her as the first female rapper to cross over into TV & film, as an artist that "broke barriers and set standards" for Black women in music to follow, and cited her as the "First Lady of Hip-Hop". For her performance as Matron "Mama" Morton in Chicago, Latifah earned a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress, becoming the first woman in hip hop to earn an Oscar nomination.


=== Cultural impact ===
Queen Latifah has been cited as an influence on R&B, soul, and hip-hop artists, such as Eve, Da Brat, Lil' Kim, Fugees, Jill Scott, Lauryn Hill, Missy Elliott, Remy Ma, Ivy Queen, Foxy Brown, Ms. Dynamite, Naughty by Nature, Rapsody, Megan Thee Stallion, as well as actors Michael K. Williams, Keke Palmer, Vin Diesel, and author Jason Reynolds.Playwright Lin-Manuel Miranda has stated that Latifah inspired the portrayal of Angelica Schuyler in the musical Hamilton. In 2020, Vogue editor Janelle Okwodu considered her a fashion icon that "helped to start a conversation about body image that continues to this day", crediting her among the first artists that pioneered the "climate of size inclusivity and muses of all shapes".


== Accolades ==

Queen Latifah became the first female hip-hop recording artist to get nominated for an Oscar. In 2003, Queen Latifah was awarded Artist of the Year by Harvard Foundation. In 2006, Latifah became the first hip-hop artist to receive a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame, and was also inducted into the New Jersey Hall of Fame in 2011. In her music career, Queen Latifah has sold nearly 2 million albums in the US. The Root ranked her at number 35 on The Root 100 list. In 2017, American Black Film Festival honored Latifah with the Entertainment Icon award. In 2018, she received an honorary Doctor of Fine Arts Degree by the Rutgers University. In 2019, Harvard University awarded the W. E. B. Du Bois Medal to Queen Latifah for cultural contributions. In 2023, Queen Latifah's debut album All Hail the Queen, was added into the Library of Congress's National Recording Registry, making it the earliest female rap recording to enter the National Recording Registry, and made her the second female hip-hop recording artist to have her music included after Lauryn Hill; however some outlets incorrectly reported her as the first to accomplish the feat.She is a recipient of a Grammy Award from six nominations, a Golden Globe Award, two Screen Actors Guild Awards from five nominations, two NAACP Image Awards from thirteen nominations, one Primetime Emmy Award from three nominations, and an Academy Award nomination. In 2021, she received the BET Lifetime Achievement Award and was the first rapper female or male to be awarded.


== Discography ==

Studio albums

All Hail the Queen (1989)
Nature of a Sista' (1991)
Black Reign (1993)
Order in the Court (1998)
The Dana Owens Album (2004)
Trav'lin' Light (2007)
Persona (2009)


== Tours ==
Latifah, Jill Scott and Erykah Badu joined to create and own the rights to the Sugar Water Festival Tour, LLC. All three singers toured together while inviting music duo Floetry in 2005 and singer Kelis in 2006 as opening acts. Comedian/actress Mo'Nique served as host for the 2006 Sugar Water Tour.

Sugar Water Festival Tour (2005–06)
Travlin' Light Tour (2007)


== Filmography ==


=== Film ===


=== Television ===


=== Music Videos ===


=== Producer ===


=== Video Games ===


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website 
Queen Latifah at IMDbLynise Walters (born September 24, 1972), known professionally as Queen Pen, is an American rapper, record producer, and novelist.  Born in Brooklyn New York, she was discovered by record producer Teddy Riley at a local IHOP restaurant in Virginia Beach.  Riley later invited her to "spit lyrics" for Blackstreet's "No Diggity" 1996 hit. Riley produced her debut album, My Melody (1997) and she coproduced her second album Conversations with Queen (2001) with Kedar Massenburg.


== Career ==
Her music career launched after she became a protégé of Teddy Riley, a record producer and member of the R&B group Blackstreet in the mid-1990s. Although she was not listed on the song, she was a featured artist alongside Dr. Dre in Blackstreet's 1996 hit, "No Diggity." She signed to Riley's Lil' Man label, and released My Melody (1997), her solo debut album, produced by Riley.Her first album produced the charted singles "Man Behind the Music," "All My Love", and "Party Ain't a Party."  She also gained notoriety for her song "Girlfriend" featuring Meshell Ndegeocello, where the lyrics explored same-sex relationships. In 1999, she took a three-year hiatus from performing and returned with Conversations with Queen (2001), her second album.  She is now an entrepreneur and novelist. Her sons Donlynn and Quintion Walters are also rappers, who go by the handles Nefu Da Don and Q Nhannaz.


== Personal life ==
After the release of the single, "Girlfriend," that contained themes that were taboo in the hip-hop community at the time, some media sources presumed Queen Pen to be bisexual or lesbian.  During the song's release, Queen Pen remained coy about her sexuality and would not disclose it unless it was going to be a "front page" story. She also added that if she told the press she was straight, she would be viewed as a liar; in turn, if she were to say she was gay, she would be viewed as someone trying to get publicity. In 2001, Queen Pen disclosed in an interview that she was neither bisexual nor lesbian.


== Controversy ==


=== Feud with Foxy Brown ===
In 1998, a dispute between Foxy Brown and Queen Pen developed over her controversial lesbian-themed single "Girlfriend." Brown, who took offense to the song's subject, spewed homophobic remarks at both Pen and former rival Queen Latifah via her diss track "10% Dis". In response, Pen reportedly confronted Brown while barefoot in the lobby of Nevada's Reno Hilton during the Impact Music Convention and tried to slap her and chase her down an elevator. The fight was broken up by producer Derek "DC" Clark and Brown's associates Noreaga and Cam'ron. Later, Queen Pen happened upon Foxy Brown again when Brown was accompanied by ex-lover Kurupt. Again, the conflict was subdued before any further physical contact occurred.In late 1998, Brown released another diss track titled "Talk to Me", which contained more homophobic remarks directed at Pen and Queen Latifah. In 2001, Pen responded to the diss track with her record "I Got Cha," in which Queen Pen called Brown a "bum bitch," and later made remarks about her being funny and fake "like a drag queen." Although Queen Pen insisted the song was not about Brown, she responded in an MTV interview: "You make a record about me, I make a record about you. Sooner or later I'm going to have to punch you in your face."  Shortly after the track's release, the feud began to die down, and by July 2006, both Pen and Brown reconciled during an attendance at Russell Simmons' Hip-Hop Summit.


== Novels ==
Situations: A Book of Short Stories (2002)
Blossom: A Novel (2007)


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===
My Melody (1997)
Conversations with Queen (2001)


=== Singles ===
"Man Behind the Music" (1997) – Hot Rap Singles #7, Billboard Hot 100 #84, UK #38
"All My Love" (1998) – US Rhythmic Top 40 #14, US Hot Rap Singles #11, US Billboard Hot 100 #28, UK #11
"Party Ain't a Party" (1998) – Rhythmic Top 40 #32, Billboard Hot 100 #74
"It's True" (1998) – UK #24
"I Got Cha" (2001)


== References ==


== External links ==
A Feisty Female Rapper Breaks a Hip-Hop TabooRadhames Rodriguez (born October 6, 1992), better known by his stage name Radamiz, is an American rapper from Brooklyn, New York. He is of Dominican descent. Radamiz is a part of the Brooklyn-based collective, Mogul Club. In 2013, he was declared as HOT 97's East Coast "Who's Next" artist and performed at Summer Jam on the festival stage later that year.


== Career ==
On April 5, 2016, Radamiz was announced as one of the performers at the 2016 Brooklyn Hip-Hop Festival opening up for Nas. Two weeks later he released his debut album, Writeous, which took four years to complete. In October 2016, Radamiz was invited on Statik Selektah's Shade 45 satellite radio show "Showoff Radio" to promote his album.In May 2018, Radamiz announced his signing to the relaunched Payday Records. That same month he released "V.I.M" produced by V'Don. Radamiz was one of the performers at the 2018 Brooklyn Hip-Hop Festival opening up for Black Star. On September 13, 2018, Radamiz was featured in a billboard and New York City Subway ad campaign in New York City for Depop. Later that month he released a follow-up single titled "NYNYNYNY". In January 2019, Radamiz was featured on a FifthGod song titled "Transgression" that included Ab-Soul and Da$H. The following month he released his third single titled "Save The Youth" featuring History & Tedy Andreas.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===
Writeous (2016)
Nothing Changes If Nothing Changes (2019)
El Duende! (2023)


=== Mixtapes ===
The Longer Way Home (2012)
Every Bad Day Has Good News (2021)


=== EPs ===
Synonyms of Strength (2020)
Gnashing, Teeth (2023)
2409 West Slauson (with Thelonious Martin) (2023)
3 Days Outside Your Body (2023)


=== Guest appearances ===


=== Music videos ===


== Filmography ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Radamiz on SoundCloudRahlique Devawn Wilks (born December 4, 1997), known professionally as Rah Swish, is an American rapper born and raised in Canarsie, Brooklyn. He is known for the hit single "Brush Em" with Pop Smoke which peaked number 1 on the Bubbling Under Hot 100 Billboard chart 2021.


== Early life ==
Rahlique Devawn Wilks was born on December 4, 1997, in Brooklyn, New York City, in the same area as fellow WOO member Pop Smoke. He grew up listening to 50 Cent, Jay-Z, The Notorious B.I.G. and Lil Wayne. He said in an interview with AllHipHop "It was cool growing up. You don’t really know nothing else so you accept what you’re in. It was calm, it was regular. Street life, young black man growing up in the hood. Regular shit." when asked about growing up in Canarsie, Brooklyn. Swish started rapping in 2015 on a song called 50 Bars Pt. 1 and began to gain buzz around Brooklyn. "From 2015 on, alright I’m a rapper now." Swish met Pop Smoke in the street when they were doing "street shit", he said in the same AllHipHop interview " We met on the block. I was rapping before him. Once he started rapping, we kept clicking together more and more. It was a vibe. You see Pop, you see Rah."


== Music career ==
He has worked with Fetty Luciano, Pop Smoke, Smokepurpp, Dusty Locane, Ron Suno, Rowdy Rebel, Fivio Foreign and many other notable rappers.As of August 2023 he has released five mixtapes, one collaborative album and 42 singles (including 13 as a featured artist).
Wilks released his debut Mixtape Look What They Started on December 4, 2019. The mixtape was supported by one single and consists of 11 songs. The original release of the mixtape featured Pop Smoke on the track "Load It" until the verse was removed and added to Pop Smoke's song "AP". The mixtape was re-released without his verse.
Wilks released his second Mixtape WOO Forever on June 26, 2020. The tape featured guest appearances from Curly Savv, Jay Gwuapo and featured a phone call from Pop Smoke on the intro. The mixtape was supported by three singles, one of which was also a single for Look What They Started. The mixtape consists of 11 songs.
His third mixtape Mayor Of The Streets was released on June 16, 2021 and featured appearances from Smokepurpp, Ron Suno, Leeky G Bando, Fetty Luciano and Young Costamado. The mixtape was supported by three singles and consists of 10 songs. 
Wilks released the collaborative mixtape Say Dat alongside Dusty Locane, Ron Suno and OnPointLikeOP on September 23, 2022 which consists of 8 songs. Wilks then went onto release his fourth mixtape The Old Me on December 16, 2022 which was supported by one single and consists of 7 songs.
Wilks released his fifth mixtape 9 Shots In The Ruger on June 9, 2023. The mixtape was supported by one single and featured appearances from Sdot Go, Ron Suno, Curly Savv, Damedot and OnPointLikeOP. This mixtape consists of 9 songs.


== Discography ==


=== Collaborative albums ===


=== Mixtapes ===


=== Singles ===


==== As lead artist ====


==== As featured artist ====


=== Other charted and certified songs ===


=== Guest appearances ===


== References ==William Michael Griffin Jr. (born January 28, 1968), better known by his stage name Rakim (), is an American rapper. One half of golden age hip hop duo Eric B. & Rakim, he is widely regarded as one of the most influential and skilled rappers of all time.Rakim is considered a transformative figure in hip hop for raising the bar for MC technique higher than it had ever been. Rakim helped to pioneer the use of internal rhymes and multisyllabic rhymes, and he was among the first to demonstrate the possibilities of sitting down to write intricately crafted lyrics packed with clever word choices and metaphors rather than the more improvisational styles and simpler rhyme patterns that predominated before him.  Rakim is also credited with creating the overall shift from the more simplistic old school flows to more complex flows.  Rapper Kool Moe Dee explained that before Rakim, the term 'flow' wasn't widely used – "Rakim is basically the inventor of flow. We were not even using the word flow until Rakim came along. It was called rhyming, it was called cadence, but it wasn't called flow. Rakim created flow!" Rakim released four albums with DJ Eric B.: Paid in Full (1987), Follow the Leader (1988), Let the Rhythm Hit 'Em (1990) and Don't Sweat the Technique (1992).  He has released three solo albums: The 18th Letter (1997), The Master (1999) and The Seventh Seal (2009).
Paid in Full was named the greatest hip hop album of all time by MTV in 2006, while Rakim himself was ranked No. 4 on MTV's list of the Greatest MCs of All Time. Steve Huey of AllMusic stated that "Rakim is near-universally acknowledged as one of the greatest MCs – perhaps the greatest – of all time within the hip-hop community". The editors of About.com ranked him No. 2 on their list of the 'Top 50 MCs of Our Time (1987–2007)'. In 2012, The Source ranked him No. 1 on their list of the "Top 50 Lyricists of All Time".


== Early life ==
Rakim is the nephew of the late R&B singer and actress Ruth Brown. He grew up in Wyandanch, New York on Long Island. He wrote his first rhyme at seven years old, about the cartoon character Mickey Mouse. He initially aspired to play professional football, and was a quarterback on his high school football team.
However, after being introduced to local DJ Eric B. by his friend Alvin Toney, he began writing lyrics to fit Eric's instrumentals and chose instead to focus on a career in music. Then known as Kid Wizard, he made his first recordings live at Wyandanch High School in the year 1985.Rakim was initially introduced to the Nation of Islam in 1986; he later joined The Nation of Gods and Earths (also known as the 5 Percent Nation) and adopted the Arabic name Rakim Allah. He also chose to use “Rakim Allah” as his stage name, although it was most often shortened to simply “Rakim”. During his career he has been nicknamed the "God MC" because of his acclaimed status as an MC and a reference to the "Allah" in his stage name, which is the Arabic word for God.


== Career ==


=== Pairing with Eric B. (1985–1992) ===

First meeting in 1985, Eric B. and Rakim went on to release four studio albums before their separation in 1992. The duo were described by journalist Tom Terrell of NPR as "the most influential DJ/MC combo in contemporary pop music period", while the editors of About.com ranked them as No. 4 on their list of the 10 Greatest Hip-Hop Duos of All-Time. They were nominated for induction into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2011, although they did not make the final selection.


==== 1986–87: Beginnings and classic debut ====

After Rakim responded to Eric B.'s search for "New York's top MC", Eric B.'s friend and roommate Marley Marl allowed them to use his home studio. The first tracks they recorded—"Eric B. Is President" and "My Melody"—were released as a single/b-side on the independent Zakia Records in 1986. After Def Jam Recordings founder Russell Simmons heard the single, the duo were signed to Island Records and began recording the album in Manhattan's Power Play Studios in early 1987.On July 7, 1987, the duo released their debut album, Paid in Full, on the Island-subsidiary label 4th & B'way Records. The album peaked at No. 58 on the Billboard 200 chart and produced five singles: "Eric B. Is President", "I Ain't No Joke", "I Know You Got Soul", "Move the Crowd", and "Paid in Full".


==== 1988–89: Sophomore peak ====

While its singles attained moderate success, Follow the Leader performed better on music charts than Eric B. & Rakim's debut album and reached number 22 on the U.S. Billboard Pop Albums chart. It has been certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America for shipments in excess of 500,000 copies in the United States. Released during hip hop's "golden age", the album was well received by critics and has since been recognized by music writers as one of the most groundbreaking and influential hip hop albums of all time. American author William Jelani Cobb wrote of the album's significance, "On the heels of Paid in Full, Eric B. & Rakim delivered a full clip of album titled Follow the Leader in 1988. Featuring a broader spectrum of sounds than the James Brown samples that had defined the initial release, Follow the Leader saw Rakim at his most lyrically fierce, issuing deft and death threats on such tracks as 'Microphone Fiend,' 'Lyrics of Fury,' and the nearly felonious 'No Competition.' The release marked the high point in the collaboration between the two and prefaced the long slide they faced in the 1990s."


==== 1990–92: Final albums and dissolution ====
Let the Rhythm Hit 'Em, released in 1990, was Eric B. & Rakim's third album. This album saw the duo's sound develop further, with Rakim adopting a deeper, more aggressive tone of voice, as well as more mature and serious subject matter. Musically, the production ranges from smoother soulful tracks such as "In the Ghetto" to the hard-edged assault of the title track. Though it could not support singles as popular as the duo's previous albums, it is considered by many to be the duo's most coherent album. It is one of the few albums to have received a "five-mic" rating from The Source. In 1998, the album was selected as one of The Source's 100 Best Rap Albums. The back cover features a dedication to the memories of Rakim's father William and producer Paul C., who had worked on many of the album's tracks before his murder in July 1989. His protégé Large Professor completed his work. Neither receive credit in the album's notes.In 1992, Eric B & Rakim released their fourth and final album, Don't Sweat the Technique. The title track was a minor radio hit. "Casualties of War" was also released as a single. "Know the Ledge" first appeared in the film Juice under the title "Juice (Know the Ledge)". However, Eric B. refused to sign MCA's release contract, fearful that Rakim would abandon him. This led to a long, complicated court battle involving the two musicians and MCA. The legal wrangling eventually led to the duo dissolving completely.


=== Solo-career (1993–present) ===


==== 1993–2003: Legal issues, solo debut, and Aftermath stint ====

After his breaking up his partnership with Eric B. in early-1993, Rakim kept a low profile, only making one notable appearance on the soundtrack to the 1993 film Gunmen. A reshuffling in MCA caused Rakim to be dropped from the label in 1994. As Rakim continued to struggle with legal problems, he secured a deal with Universal Records and began recording his solo debut album The 18th Letter in 1996. In November 1997, the album The 18th Letter was released. Expectations were high for Rakim, as the album debuted at #4 on the Billboard 200 and was certified Gold by the RIAA.
In June 1999, Rakim appeared on three tracks of "The Seduction of Claude Debussy" by Art of Noise. AllMusic's Keith Farley notes that "the album charts the artistic use of sampled breakbeats – pioneered by the Art of Noise themselves – with nods to '80s hip-hop plus their '90s equivalent, drum'n'bass."In November 1999, Rakim released The Master, which received good reviews but sold poorly.Rakim was signed to Dr. Dre's Aftermath Entertainment record label in 2000, for work on an album tentatively titled Oh, My God. The album underwent numerous changes in artistic direction and personnel and was delayed several times. While working on the album, Rakim made guest appearances on four Aftermath projects, including the hit single "Addictive" by Truth Hurts and its remix (which featured a different Rakim verse from the main version), the Dr. Dre-produced "The Watcher Part 2" by Jay-Z, and Eminem's 8 Mile soundtrack album with the track "R.A.K.I.M".
However, Rakim left the label in 2003 and Oh, My God was indefinitely shelved. After Rakim eventually left Aftermath Entertainment, he stated that the reason he departed the label was because of creative differences with Dr. Dre. Discussing the period later, Rakim discussed how he was seeking to write conscious material, while Dr. Dre was encouraging him to pursue gangsta rap narratives instead.


==== 2007–2009: The Seventh Seal ====
Rakim retreated to his Connecticut estate to work leisurely on music. Not having released an album since 1999, he eschewed touring in favor of infrequent gigs. Rakim was able to retain the tracks he had made with Dr. Dre and, in 2006, announced that he would release a new studio album, The Seventh Seal. The album was delayed into 2009; instead, he followed up with a live album, The Archive: Live, Lost & Found, in 2008. In an interview with Billboard in 2007, when asked about story behind The Seventh Seal's title, Rakim said,

The number 7 has a lot of significance. The seventh letter of the [Supreme] alphabet is G—that stands for God. There are seven continents, seven seas. The Seventh Seal deals with that and also some revelations in the Bible. Some call it the end of the world, but for me it's the end of the old and the beginning of the new. By me naming my album that, I'm using it metaphorically in hip hop. I'm hoping to kill the old state of hip hop and start with the new.
In another interview with Billboard in 2009, he stated,

The seals are from the Bible—Revelations and the coming of the Apocalypse. But Islam, Judaism, Christianity—all have a version of the same events. The Lion of Judah breaks the seven seals one by one, each imparting knowledge and inflicting catastrophe, ending with seven trumpets announcing the end of Times. After the Apocalypse, God rises from the ashes to recreate the Kingdom, taking only the greatest elements from the past with them. When you look at Hip-Hop, I want to do that: to spit fire and take our best from the ashes to build our kingdom; to recognize all the regional styles, conscious lyrics, the tracks, underground, mainstream, the way we treat each other. Lose the garbage and rebuild our scene. I've always tried to insert consciousness and spirituality in my records, interpreting the writings of all cultures and religions and how they apply to life in modern times.
The Seventh Seal was released on November 17, 2009, after several delays on Rakim's own Ra Records, TVM, and SMC Recordings and distributed through Fontana and Universal Music Group. Considered a comeback album after a ten-year gap between releases, the album features the two singles: "Holy Are You", which was released on July 14, 2009, and "Walk These Streets" which was released on October 7, 2009. It features production from several renowned hip hop artists, including Nottz, J. Wells, Needlz, Jake One, and Nick Wiz. The album sold 12,000 copies in the United States by November 22, 2009, according to SoundScan. Upon its release, The Seventh Seal received generally mixed or average reviews from most music critics; it holds an aggregate score of 59/100 at Metacritic.


==== 2011–present: Fourth studio-album ====
In 2011, Rakim performed Paid in Full in its entirety at the Blue Note Jazz Club in New York City, in honor of the album's 25th anniversary. He was backed by The Roots.In 2012, Rakim announced that he and Eric B. would release a 25th anniversary edition of their 1987 album Paid in Full, which would contain new tracks recorded by Eric B. & Rakim, by the end of 2012; Rakim announced he would release a new solo album by the end of 2012. He performed at the annual Roots' Picnic in Philadelphia in June. In an interview with The Detroit Free Press he announced he was in the studio with Pharrell Williams working on a new album set to be released in 2013, saying the first single will be released before the end of the year.On September 24, 2013, he released a collaborative single with DMX entitled "Don't Call Me".In 2014, Rakim is featured on the collaborative single with American rock band Linkin Park, titled "Guilty All the Same". The song was released on March 6, 2014, by Warner Bros. Records as the first single from their sixth studio album, titled The Hunting Party. He contributed his rhymes during the bridge for the main version of the song; however, he is not featured on the radio edit of the song. The song was officially released on March 7, 2014, for digital download.
On April 27, 2015, Rakim announced he was working on a new album and planned to release it in the middle or end of 2015. He said "This is one of those albums where I can have fun. My last album, The Seventh Seal, was somewhat of a conscious album. I wanted to make a statement on that album."In late-June 2018, a new song, "King's Paradise", was released on Luke Cage: Season 2 (Original Soundtrack Album). Rakim performed the song for the first time on NPR's Tiny Desk Concerts series along with former A Tribe Called Quest member Ali Shaheed Muhammad and producer Adrian Younge.


=== Reunion with Eric B. (2016–present) ===
On October 20, 2016, it was announced via Twitter that Rakim had reunited with Eric B. after 23 years. The duo teased a potential reunion tour the next morning, hosting a poll for the fans to give their opinion on what city Eric B. & Rakim should start the tour. Four locations were the potential candidates: New York City, Las Vegas, London, and Australia. Since the announcement of the reunion, fans have speculated if the two will drop a new studio album in the near future.


== Artistry ==
Rakim's rhyming deviated from the simple rhyme patterns of early 1980s hip hop. His free-rhythm style ignored bar lines and had earned comparisons to jazz pianist Thelonious Monk. The New York Times' Ben Ratliff wrote that Rakim's "unblustery rapping developed the form beyond the flat-footed rhythms of schoolyard rhymes". While many rappers developed their technique through improvisation, Rakim was one of the first to demonstrate advantages of a writerly style, as with for instance his pioneering use of internal rhymes and multisyllabic rhymes. Unlike previous rappers such as LL Cool J, KRS-One, and Run-D.M.C., who delivered their vocals with high energy, Rakim employed a relaxed, stoic delivery. According to MTV, "We'd been used to MCs like Run and DMC, Chuck D and KRS-One leaping on the mic shouting with energy and irreverence, but Rakim took a methodical approach to his microphone fiending. He had a slow flow, and every line was blunt, mesmeric." Rakim's relaxed delivery results from his jazz influences; he had played the saxophone and was a John Coltrane fan.Artists and critics often credit Rakim with creating the overall shift from the more simplistic old school flows to more complex flows. Kool Moe Dee says, "any emcee that came after 1986 had to study Rakim just to know what to be able to do. [...] Rakim, in 1986, gave us flow and that was the rhyme style from 1986 to 1994. [...] From that point on, anybody emceeing was forced to focus on their flow." Kool Moe Dee explains that before Rakim, the term 'flow' wasn't widely used – "Rakim is basically the inventor of flow. We were not even using the word flow until Rakim came along. It was called rhyming, it was called cadence, but it wasn't called flow. Rakim created flow!" He adds that while Rakim upgraded and popularized the focus on flow, "he didn't invent the word".Rakim's subject matter often covered his own rapping skills and lyrical superiority over other rappers. AllMusic editor Steve Huey comments that "the majority of his lyrics concern his own skills and his Islamic faith." He also notes Rakim for his "complex internal rhymes, compounding, literate imagery, velvet-smooth flow, and unpredictable, off-the-beat rhythms." Pitchfork writer Jess Harvell described his rapping as "authoritative, burnished, [and] possessing an unflappable sense of rhythm".


== Legacy ==
Paid in Full was released during the period that became known as golden age hip hop. Alex Ogg considered it the duo's magnum opus in his book The Men Behind Def Jam. Rakim's rapping set a blueprint for future rappers and helped secure East Coast hip hop's reputation for innovative lyrical technique. William Jelani Cobb stated in his book To the Break of Dawn that his rapping had "stepped outside" of the preceding era of old school hip hop and that while the vocabulary and lyrical dexterity of newer rappers had improved, it was "nowhere near what Rakim introduced to the genre". The New York Times' Dimitri Ehrlich, who described the album as "an artistic and commercial benchmark", credited Rakim for helping "give birth to a musical genre" and leading "a quiet musical revolution, introducing a soft-spoken rapping style". Allmusic's Steve Huey declared Paid in Full one of hip hop's most influential albums and "essential listening" for those interested in the genre's "basic musical foundations". MTV ranked it at number one in "The Greatest Hip-Hop Albums of All Time", stating it raised the standards of hip hop "both sonically and poetically" and described it as "captivating, profound, innovative and instantly influential". The album is broken down track-by-track by Rakim in Brian Coleman's book Check the Technique.Rolling Stone magazine listed it at number 227 on "The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time", calling it "Ice-grilled, laid-back, diamond-sharp: Rakim is a front-runner in the race for Best Rapper Ever, and this album is a big reason why." Similarly, Blender magazine included the album in its "500 CDs You Must Own Before You Die". Time magazine listed it as one of the eighteen albums of the 1980s in its "All-TIME 100" albums; editor Alan Light acknowledged the record for changing the "sound, flow, and potential" of hip hop and that if Rakim is "the greatest MC of all time, as many argue, this album is the evidence".
Jess Harvell of Pitchfork complimented Rakim for an "endless display of pure skill" and described the album as "laidback and funky", but believed it contained "too much filler to get a free 'classic' pass". Pitchfork placed Paid in Full at number fifty-two in its "Top 100 Albums of the 1980s"; editor Sam Chennault wrote that Rakim inspired a generation of MCs and "defined what it meant to be a hip-hop lyricist". The rappers who have used the unique rapping style employed by Rakim and attribute it as inspiration include GZA, Ghostface Killah, and Raekwon (from the Wu-Tang Clan), Tupac, Nas, Kool G. Rap, Jay-Z, The Notorious B.I.G., Eminem, 50 Cent, and many more. On July 11, 1995, the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) certified the album platinum. As of December 1997, it has sold over a million copies.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===
Solo

The 18th Letter (1997)
The Master (1999)
The Seventh Seal (2009)With Eric B. & Rakim

Paid in Full (1987)
Follow the Leader (1988)
Let the Rhythm Hit 'Em (1990)
Don't Sweat the Technique (1992)


== See also ==


== References ==

Sources


== Further reading ==
Rakim; Bakari Kitwana (2020). Sweat the Technique: Revelations on Creativity from the Lyrical Genius. Amistad Press. ISBN 978-0-0628-5024-9.


== External links ==

Official website
Rakim at IMDb
Rakim at AllMusic
Rakim discography at DiscogsKyle Sutton (born 1980), better known by his stage name Kyle Rapps, is an American hip hop artist from New York City.


== Early life and education ==
Sutton was born in Grand Rapids, Michigan, and raised in Princeton, New Jersey, primarily by his mother. His father was a minister. Sutton attended Rutgers University, earning a BA in Spanish. In 2015, he relocated from Harlem, New York to Mexico City, Mexico.


== Career ==


=== As Skeptik ===
While at Rutgers, under the pseudonym Skeptik, he formed the underground hip hop group Thought Breakers. Their debut EP, Episode 1, was released in 2004 and independently sold over 10,000 copies. The group opened for Wyclef Jean, Fat Joe, Talib Kweli and Dead Prez. Around that time, he formed a spoken-word poetry collective, Mayhem Poets. In 2007, the collective won a Microsoft small business competition, enabling them to establish the open mic venue Slam Chops in Manhattan, which stayed open for two years. Also in 2007, the collective had a two-month off-Broadway run at the New Victory Theater. After a 2009 trip to Liberia with Mayhem Poets, Sutton began to go by the name Black Skeptik, and released titles "Rent" and "Frankenstein Saves Hip Hop".


=== As Kyle Rapps ===
In 2010, now going by Kyle Rapps, he released the single "Love, Love," featuring KRS-One and Homeboy Sandman. In 2011, his RE-Edutainment mixtape came out, with the title in homage to the 1990 Boogie Down Productions album Edutainment. KRS-One, Joell Ortiz and U-N-I appear on the mixtape. Later in 2011, Rapps released On Air, featuring appearances from Talib Kweli, C-Rayz Walz, KRS-One and Homeboy Sandman. The eight-track mixtape is built around samples from French electronic music duo Air.In June 2013, Mishka NYC Records released SUB, Rapps' first full-length album, produced by Belief and featuring collaborations with Murs, Action Bronson, Mr. Muthafuckin' eXquire, Aaron Cohen and Spaceman. Earmilk called it "a mesmerizing selection of songs."In 2014, Rapps put out the single "The Sky's on Fire", produced by Belief and featuring vocals by Adrienne Mack-Davis.In 2017, Rapps released "Latrell", its title and sampled intro referencing Latrell Sprewell, a former professional basketball player who was suspended for attacking his Golden State Warriors coach P.J. Carlesimo in 1997.In 2020, Rapps performed virtually over Zoom at Soul Vey, a Black and Jewish community event led by Adam Swig and Kosha Dillz.Rapps has collaborated with a large variety of other music artists, including KRS-One, Homeboy Sandman, Diwon, Action Bronson, Mr. Muthafuckin' eXquire, Murs, Adrienne Mack-Davis, Belief, Hefna Gwap, Talib Kweli, Chuuwee, Faruz Feet, Dirt E. Dutch, Joell Ortiz, Sly5thAve, Aaron Cohen, Brody, Y-Love, Nathan Sela, Vulkan the Krusader, Sam Siegel, S'natra, DJ JS-1, Breez Brewin, Dru the Monster, Nelson, Little Freckles, Ali Salah Rasé, and Ray Contour.


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===
SUB (w/ Belief) (2013, Mishka NYC Records)
Colossus Theory (w/ Vulkan The Krusader) (2015)
Perverse Ramblings (2017)


=== Singles ===
"Rent" – as Black Skeptik, with KRS-One (2009, Mayhem Poets Entertainment)
"Frankenstein Saves Hip Hop" – as Black Skeptik (2009, Mayhem Poets Entertainment, Blockhead)
"Love, Love" – featuring KRS-One and Homeboy Sandman (2010, Diamond Music Group / Mayhem Poets Entertainment)
"Portlandia" – with Diwon (2012, Shemspeed)
"Mr. Rogers" – with Diwon (2012, Shemspeed)
"Get It In" – featuring Action Bronson (2012, Mishka NYC - from SUB)
"Watch Out" (2013, Mishka NYC - from SUB)
"Super Glue" – featuring Mr. Muthafuckin' eXquire (2013, Mishka NYC - from SUB)
"Architecture" – featuring Murs (2013, Mishka NYC - from SUB)
"The Sky's on Fire" – featuring Adrienne Mack-Davis and Belief (2014)
"Hold Tyte" with Hefna Gwap (2014, Mishka NYC - from European Tic Tacs)
"Searchin'" with Hefna Gwap featuring Aaron Cohen (2014, Mishka NYC - from European Tic Tacs)
"God-Like" (2015 - from Colossus Theory)
"D.F." (2015 - from Colossus Theory)
"Bunker" (2016)
"Michigan" (2016, Diamond Music Group)
"Fiction" (2017 - from Perverse Ramblings)
"Eulogy" (2017 -  from Perverse Ramblings)
"Latrell" (2017 - from Perverse Ramblings)
"Dark Hour" (2018)
"Green on Red" (2018)
"Shiba Inu" (2018)
"Fxckvision" (2019)
"Art Monk" (2019, Mayhem Entertainment)
"Black Suburbs" (2019, Mayhem Entertainment)
"TD" (2019, Mayhem Entertainment)
"This is Medicine" with Talib Kweli (2019)
"Don't Try" (2019, Mayhem Entertainment)
"Gtfo" with Chuuwee (2020)
"Barrio Chino" with Faruz Feet (2020)
"Mrs. Huxtable" with Dirt E. Dutch and Chris Keys (2020, Mayhem Entertainment)
"Bitd" with Joell Ortiz (2020)
"Mourning" with Sly5thAve (2020)


=== Mixtapes ===
Episode 1 – as Skeptik, with Thought Breakers (2004)
RE-Edutainment (2011)
On Air (2011)
Syndication (w/ Diwon) (2012)


=== EPs ===
Tyrone Gosling w/ Diwon
European Tic Tacs w/ Hefna Gwap (Mishka NYC, 2014)


=== Collaborations ===
"Let It Go" – Dirt E. Dutch featuring Kyle Rapps (2011, Little Ax - from Bars Magica)
"Forget It"- Aaron Cohen featuring Kyle Rapps (2012, Mishka NYC - from MURK)
"Good Life" – Diwon featuring Brody, Kyle Rapps, Y-Love and Nathan Sela (2013, Bancs Media - from New Game)
"Hikaru" - Vulkan The Krusader featuring Kyle Rapps (2014, from VX-13: Do You Remember Love)
"Lifted (Remix)" - Sam Siegel & S'natra featuring Kyle Rapps, Hefna Gwap, Lord of the Fly, and T-Shyne (2014)
"110 Percent" - DJ JS-1 featuring Breez Brewin, Homeboy Sandman and Kyle Rapps (2014, Ground Original - from It is What it Isn't)
"Clyde Frazier" - Dru the Monster featuring Kyle Rapps (2015 - from Monsters Never Die)
"Lost Touch" - Nelson featuring Kyle Rapps (2015,  RRCB/Diamond Media 360 - from Seven Ye)
"Sleep on It" - Little Freckles, written in collaboration with Kyle Rapps (2015)[1]
"Wieder" - Ali Salah Rasé featuring Kyle Rapps (2017, Hiena Voyeur - from Prieto)
"I Got a Story to Tell" - Ray Contour featuring Kyle Rapps (2019 - from East Coast Gold)


== References ==Chron Smith (born October 1, 1976), better known by his stage name Hell Razah, is an American rapper. He is best known as a member of Sunz of Man, an early affiliate group of the Wu-Tang Clan.
Razah is rumored to have suffered a brain aneurysm in April 2010. He was quick to recover and continue recording. He came to adopt the moniker Heaven Razah.


== Recording history ==


=== Da Last Future & Sunz of Man ===
Razah made his rap debut in the early 90s as a member of the group Da Last Future, an early incarnation of the Sunz of Man, which included Killah Priest, Shabazz the Disciple, Prodigal Sunn, Supreme and 7th Ambassador. Razah and 7th Ambassador self-released the single "Livin' in Hell" b/w "Mental Combat" independently before the group adopted the Sunz of Man moniker. Razah recorded a number of tracks with the group before their induction into the Wu-Tang family, including "Deep in the Water", "Writing Rhymes With a Liquid Pen" (aka "Elements"), "Lulla Bye" and "Psychic Hotline".In 1995, the group adopted the moniker Sunz of Man, and signed a record deal with Wu-Tang/Priority Records. SoM released a number of singles on Wu-Tang Records, including "Soldiers of Darkness", "No Love Without Hate" and "Bloody Choices", in anticipation of their 1996 debut album Nothing New Under the Sun. Due to internal conflicts and label complications, the album was shelved. Sunz of Man later signed a record deal with Red Ant Entertainment for the release of their official 1998 debut The Last Shall Be First, with the group's roster shaved down to just Razah, Killah Priest, Prodigal Sunn and 60 Second Assassin. The album was one of the most successful Wu-Tang affiliate releases, debuting at No. 20 on the Billboard 200 album chart, and No. 7 on the R&B/Hip-Hop chart.After the departure of Killah Priest in 1998, the group took a hiatus. 1999 saw the release of The First Testament, which featured previously recorded material from the group, including the early tracks from Da Last Future. Razah, Prodigal Sunn and 60 Second Assassin returned in 2002 with the album Saviorz Day, the second official Sunz of Man studio album. The group has yet to release a third studio album, but it has been reported that the group has reconciled with Shabazz the Disciple, Killah Priest and Supreme.


=== Solo career ===
Razah made his solo debut in 2001, though quietly, with the independent release When All Hell Breaks Loose. The album featured guest appearances from 7th Ambassador, Killah Priest, Prodigal Sunn and Timbo King of Royal Fam, and production from Supreme. The album spawned the single "Champaigne Room" b/w "Ghetto Love". The tracks "Must B tha Music", "Oh! Now You Bangin'", "Ghetto Government", "Champaigne Room", "Like It or Not", "What We Came to Do", "B.B.P. (Business Before Pleasure)" and "Rowdy, Rowdy" made up roughly half of the 2004 Sunz of Man compilation Elements, with the other half made up of tracks from The First Testament.Razah's next solo album, Renaissance Child, was released in early 2007 on Nature Sounds Records. The album featured appearances from Timbo King, Tragedy Khadafi, R.A. the Rugged Man, Talib Kweli, Viktor Vaughn, Bronze Nazareth, Killah Priest and Ras Kass, and production from Godz Wrath, MF DOOM, Bronze Nazareth, Krohme and 4th Disciple. The album was a well-received, critical success and featured the singles "The Renaissance" and "Buried Alive" b/w "Project Jazz".
In October 2007, Razah released his next album, Razah's Ladder, entirely produced by the production duo Blue Sky Black Death. The album also was acclaimed, due to BSBD's soulful production work, and also to Razah's new spiritual lyrical direction, inspired by the recent death of his father. The album featured guest appearances from Prodigal Sunn, Shabazz the Disciple, Crooked I, Ill Bill and Sabac Red, and featured no singles. Self-funded videos were shot for the tracks "Razah's Ladder" and "Audiobiography", the latter directed by Sunz of Man producer Supreme, and "Razah's Ladder",


=== Collaborations ===
In 2004, Hell Razah and 4th Disciple released a full-length collaboration album, Freedom of Speech, under the title "Sunz of Man presents". The album featured fifteen newly recorded tracks with 4th Disciple, and five other previously released tracks from When All Hell Breaks Loose. The album featured the single "Article One" b/w "Project Love".In 2005, Razah, Killah Priest, Royal Fam's Timbo King, Tragedy Khadafi and William Cooper formed the underground supergroup Black Market Militia. The group released their self-titled debut album Black Market Militia that same year, with production from Godz Wrath and Bronze Nazareth, and guest appearances from dead prez and Abiodun Oyewole of The Last Poets. The album spawned the singles "Audobon Ballroom" b/w "Thug Nation"/"Hood Lullabye" and "Gem Stars" b/w "Mayday!". By the end of 2005, Hell Razah had named Saul Abraham the latest addition to the line-up. Razah's next album collaboration album was with Shabazz the Disciple and producer Ayatollah as the group T.H.U.G. Angelz, titled Welcome to Red Hook Houses, to be released on July 8, 2008 on Babygrande Records. Other releases came in 2008 such as solo album titled Heaven Razah, and Article 2: Right to Bare Arms, a second full-length collaboration with 4th Disciple. In an October 2007 interview, Razah also announced plans for numerous other releases for the year. He announced that the Sunz of Man were reunited and planned on releasing an album sometime soon. He also stated that The Maccabeez, a group consisting of himself, Killah Priest and Timbo King, were nearly finished recording their debut album. Black Market Militia are also planning for another album. Another possible release is a collaboration between Razah, Shabazz and Blue Sky Black Death, and a project from G.G.O. (Ghetto Government Officialz), which consists of Razah, 7th Ambassador, Lazarus, Face God and other Red Hook locals.Hell Razah suffered a Brain Aneurysm in 2010. After surviving that near death experience, he began to go under the name Heaven Razah.
In 2011, Hell Razah's health was improving and he said on Twitter several albums will come out in the future, including Heaven Razah 2, the second album with Shabazz the Disciple as T.H.U.G. Angelz (produced by Ayatollah and 4th Disciple), Razah's Ladder 2 produced by Blue Sky Black Death, a gospel/rock album produced by Krohme called Krohme Razahs, an album with Shyheim called The Verrazano and the sequel to Freedom of Speech called Write to Bare Arms produced by 4th Disciple. An album with Killah Priest as Thug Vaticans called The Lamb’s Supper will come out in 2013. Another collaboration album, with producer Tokyo Cigar under the name Heavenly Cartel, is planned for 2013 and is called Spiritual Kung Fu. He's also doing an album with producer Bronze Nazareth. He also started a hiphop/soul group together with producer Shroom and singer Tarone Rachamim called The Dutch and they are planning to release their first album in the future, which is called Music from the Heart.Heaven Razah Part 2 became Living After Death and was released on iTunes on March 31, 2013. In May, Hell Razah announced the formal roster of his new label, Hell Razah Music Inc. to include Razah's oldest son "Heaven Sun" aka Yung Razah, Queen the Prophet, Scripture, and a few more to formally represent Razah's long time "Ghetto Govt" global movement also known as "GGO" (Ghetto Govt Officialz). The Ghetto Govt Movement has global chapters that are dedicated to making a positive impact in their communities as well as in the underground hip-hop community.
Risen: The Story of Chron "Hell Razah" Smith - Documentary
Risen: The Story of Chron “Hell Razah” Smith which is a documentary directed by Frank Meyer and stars Wu Tang’s RZA, Cappadonna and Popa Wu, Sunz of Man members Killah Priest, Prodigal Sunn, 60-Second Assassin and Shabazz the Disciple, producers A. Supreme Wilder and Tom "Shroom" Johnson, rappers RA The Rugged Man and Ras Kass, industry heavyweight Randy Philips (AEG, Global Ent.), Hell Razah’s family and friends, and many more. Risen is executive produced by Digital Reacharound CEO Robert Juster, produced by film maker Paul Harb (The Expendables, Rambo, Rocky Balboa), and Esquire Network’s Michael D’Alonzo, with Cinematography by Jason Valdez. Risen: The Story of Chron “Hell Razah” Smith is available on Amazon Prime Video, Tubi, and You Tube. https://www.amazon.com/Risen-Story-Chron-Razah-Smith/dp/B085RC21RB
In 2019, Razah was featured in the song "The Grandmaster" on Cryptik Soul's album Killer's Blood.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===
Hell Razah

When All Hell Breaks Loose (2001)
Freedom of Speech (2004) (produced by 4th Disciple)
Renaissance Child (2007)
Razah's Ladder (2007) (produced by Blue Sky Black Death)
Ultra Sounds of a Renaissance Child (2008)
Heaven Razah (2010)
Living After Death (2013)
El Raziel (2015)
Spiritual Scarface (2019) (produced by Melvin Junko)
Spiritual Kung Fu (2021) (produced by Tokyo Cigar Society)
The Black Superman (2021) (produced by Chosen1 Beats)
Three Musicians (2022) (produced by Shaolin Beats)
Classic Renaissance Rhymes (2022) (produced by Sacx One)
Once Upon a Time in Brooklyn (2022) (produced by Bizi Beats)
Heavens Warriors (2022) (produced by Bo Faat)
Heaven's Road (2022) (produced by RoadsArt)
Hell's Road (2022) (produced by RoadsArt)
Risen: The Story of Chron "Hell Razah" Smith (2022)
In The Beginning Was... The Memra Volume 1 (2023) (produced by King David Son)
The Black Superman 2 (2023) (produced by Chosen1 Beats)
Renaissance Art (2023) (produced by RoadsArt)Sunz of Man

The Last Shall Be First (1998)
Saviorz Day (2002)
The Rebirth (2019)Collaborations

Black Market Militia (2005) (with Black Market Militia)
The Spooks Who Kicked Down Tha Doorz (2005) (with Maccabeez)
Welcome to Red Hook Houses (2008) (with Shabazz the Disciple, as T.H.U.G. Angelz)
R.I.P. Thug Angels (2015) (with Shabazz the Disciple, as T.H.U.G. Angelz)
Blaxploitation: A Piece Of The Action (2017) (with Ayatollah)


== References ==


== External links ==
Official websiteMahmood Abdul-Ghafur, also known as Oryn the Rebel is an American rapper from Boston, Massachusetts and a frequent collaborator with many internationally established and up-and-coming acts. Oryn the Rebel is also known as a founding member of multi-genre fusion group Project Hybrid. He has been notably featured on the "Underground Heat" mixtapes hosted by New York DJ Grandmaster Caz.Oryn the Rebel originally went by the name Oryn, or O-ry-n, until Leo the Godless, a Malden-Revere-based rapper gave him the title "the Rebel".


== Background ==
Oryn the Rebel comes from a Muslim upbringing and a family of activists and philanthropists. His sister Saleemah Abdul-Ghafur, author of Living Islam Out Loud: American Muslim Women Speak, was selected to participate in the Muslim Leaders of Tomorrow retreat hosted by the World Economic Forum in Copenhagen, Denmark in 2006. She remains an outspoken activist on the front to combat deaths caused by malaria.


== United Front Company ==
The United Front Company is a collection of creatives, musical and non-musical alike, and independently owned companies coming together to form a larger platform - The Artist Jumpoff. Together members of the UFC help one another to promote and earn revenue through their art by pooling their talent, skills, fans and knowledge. The common philosophy at the UFC is no contracts as the focus remains on the artistic aspect rather than the business one.


== Underground Heat ==
Underground Heat Vol 1, a mixtape series bringing together underground rappers from across the country, included two of Oryn's songs alongside works by Freeway and Shock G. This collaboration was mixed and hosted by Grandmaster Caz.


== References ==


== External links ==
ReverbNation.com
Oryntherebel.com
ArtistJumpOff.comJermaine Alfred Denny (born September 19, 1976), better known by his stage name Red Café, is a Guyanese-American rapper. At various points in his career, he was signed to Fabolous' Street Family Records, Puff Daddy's Bad Boy Records, Akon's Konvict Muzik, Mack 10's Hoo-Bangin Records, and Trackmasters' namesake record label. He has also ghostwritten for many popular rappers over the years.


== Personal life ==
Red Café is an East Coast rapper, and has been closely identified with Brooklyn, New York City throughout his career. His nickname "Red" was his father's nickname; "Red Café" is what was stamped on bags of his drug merchandise. Café stated that he was born in Guyana, but he and his family moved to Brooklyn at the age of six.He was imprisoned for four years starting in 1992.


== Career ==
After his release from jail he joined the group Da Franchise, which was signed by Violator Records but was not successful and disbanded. He was signed by Arista in 2003, by Capitol (Hoo-Bangin' Records) in 2005, by Universal (Konvict Muzik) in 2006, and then Interscope (Konvict Musik) in 2007, but released no albums. His song All Night Long was included on the 2005 Coach Carter soundtrack. As an underground rapper, his work is not internationally recognized, though he has been rapping on the circuit since the late 1990s.
He released an album with DJ Envy, The Co-Op, in 2007. Remy Ma was featured on the album. Red Cafe made an original song, "Stick'm" for the video game Grand Theft Auto IV.
On March 17, 2011, Café released his retail mixtape, Above the Cloudz. On January 13, 2012, Café released his mixtape Hell's Kitchen. On December 12, 2012, Café released his mixtape American Psycho. American Psycho has featurings coming from French Montana, Chief Keef, Fabolous, Jeremih, T-Pain, Trey Songz, The Game, and 2 Chainz, with production from Young Chop, Reefa, Soundsmith Productions, and others.On February 17, 2014, Café released his mixtape American Psycho 2. On July 29, 2014, Café released his latest single entitled "Pretty Gang" featuring frequent collaborator and close friend Fabolous. Red Cafe was uncredited for featured vocals on Rick Ross' eighth studio album, Black Market, which was released on December 4, 2015.


=== Acting ===
In 2009, Café played Primo, the freestyle battle rapper, in the 2009 Biggie Smalls biopic Notorious. In 2011, he performed at the debut television event of the Urban Wrestling Federation, though the show was never released.


== Discography ==

Collaborative albumsThe Co-Op (with DJ Envy)


== References ==Reginald Noble (born April 17, 1970), better known by his stage name Redman, is an American rapper, DJ, record producer, and actor. He rose to fame in the early 1990s as an artist on the Def Jam label.
He is well known for his collaborations with his close friend Method Man, as one-half of the rap duo Method Man & Redman including their starring roles in films and sitcoms which include How High and Method and Red.  He was also a member of the Def Squad in the late 1990s.


== Early life ==
Born and raised in Newark, New Jersey, Redman attended Speedway Avenue School and 13th Avenue School before attending West Side High School, an experience he described as "off the hook".In 1987, Redman was expelled from Montclair State University his freshman year due to poor academic performance at age 16. Having no other options, Redman then went back home to live with his mother, Darlene Noble, who eventually kicked him out of her house for selling cocaine. Two years later, at age 18, Redman was a young DJ-MC who went by the name "DJ Kut-Killa". He freestyled over funk and hip hop instrumental tracks on vinyl records in various parks and house parties around New York and New Jersey.
Redman was eventually discovered by Erick Sermon of EPMD while he was a DJ for Lords of the Underground. Sermon said when he met Redman for the first time, "I knew there was something spectacular about him. Right off the bat. The next day, we talked. And within the next two or three months, he moved to Long Island, to my crib. He moved right into my apartment." After moving in with Sermon, Redman went out on tour with EPMD. While on tour with the group he did everything from carrying their bags to coming out on stage and doing rap freestyles. In 1990, at an EPMD show in New York, Redman was invited onstage by Erick Sermon where he delivered a rap freestyle that changed his life. He freestyled a song describing himself as a rapper using every letter in the alphabet, from A to Z. After this, Redman was an official rap artist and began production with Erick Sermon on his first major label album, Whut? Thee Album.


== Music career ==


=== Whut? Thee Album & Dare Iz a Darkside (1990–1995) ===
In 1990, Redman made his official debut on EPMD's album Business as Usual, appearing on the tracks "Hardcore" and "Brothers on My Jock".
In 1992, Redman released his debut album, Whut? Thee Album, which AllMusic noted for blending "reggae and funk influences" with a "terse, though fluid rap style". The album peaked at number forty-nine on the Billboard 200 and was certified gold. He was named "Rap Artist of the Year" by The Source. Redman followed this up with his 1994 album, Dare Iz a Darkside. The first single, "Rockafella", samples Leon Haywood's "I Want'a Do Something Freaky to You" and George Clinton's "Flash Light", two of the most sampled songs in hip hop. Redman's second album was notable for having most of the tracks produced by the artist himself (later on Redman would let other producers make most of his beats). During this time he used former mentor Erick Sermon to produce his records, including "Pick It Up" and "Whateva Man" from Muddy Waters.
In 1992, Redman appeared in A Tribe Called Quest's "Scenario" music video.Redman released his second studio album, Dare Iz a Darkside on November 22, 1994, by Def Jam Recordings. The album debuted at 13 on the US Billboard 200. The album was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America. Redman has said that he was on drugs during the recording of the album, and said in 2010 that he had not played the album in recent years because it was made during a particularly dark period in his life.


=== Muddy Waters (1996–1997) ===
On December 10, 1996, Redman released his third album Muddy Waters, which was highly praised by critics. The album featured two of his Billboard's hit singles: "Whateva Man" and "It's Like That (My Big Brother)". The song "Do What You Feel" appeared on the soundtrack to the video game Grand Theft Auto: Liberty City Stories. The album was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) on February 12, 1997. During this time, with newfound friendships with Method Man and Tupac, they both appeared on Tupac's double album All Eyez on Me on the song "Got my Mind Made Up".
In 1999 Redman took part in the Hard Knock Life Tour, including a stop in Toronto at the Air Canada Centre.


=== Doc's da Name 2000 & Blackout (1998–1999) ===
In 1998 Redman released his first collaboration album El Nino with group Def Squad. His fourth studio album Doc's Da Name 2000 was a top seller, shipping platinum in sales and exceeding his previous record of gold. It peaked at number 11 on the Billboard 200 and had three songs ("I'll Bee Dat", "Da Goodness", "Let Da Monkey Out") that charted.
With his labelmate Method Man, Redman made a featured appearance on the Doc's Da Name 2000 record on the song "Well All Rite Cha". In 1999, Method Man and Redman released a collaborative album called Blackout!.


=== Malpractice (2001) ===
In 2001 Redman released his fifth studio album Malpractice. It reached number 4 on the Billboard 200 and was certified gold by the RIAA on July 21, 2001. It boasted two singles "Let's Get Dirty (I Can't Get in da Club)" and "Smash Sumthin'".


=== Mixtapes, Collaborations & Production (2002–2006) ===
Since the release of Malpractice, he has kept his fans happy by independently releasing the Ill At Will mixtapes, which feature various members of his new record label Gilla House members under Redman's Gilla House imprint include Saukrates, Icarus, Ready Roc, E3, Young Heat, and Melanie.
Redman had his best-known international hit with Christina Aguilera, when he was featured on her 2002 single "Dirrty". Around this time he was also featured on a popular remix of Pink's track Get This Party Started. He is cited in the song "'Till I Collapse" as one of rapper Eminem's favorite rappers.
Under his birthname, Reggie Noble, Redman has done production for himself, many of his crew members, and even Shaquille O'Neal on his Shaq-Fu: Da Return album.


=== Red Gone Wild (2007–2008) ===
In March 2007, Redman released Red Gone Wild, produced by Chris Pinset. He stated on MySpace that the reason for the long wait to drop the album was the fast-changing pace of hip hop.
On March 27, 2007, Redman confirmed on BET's Rap City: Tha Bassment that the sequel to How High, How High 2, was currently being written. In an April 10, 2007, Onion A.V. Club interview, Redman hinted that there would be a second collaborative album with Method Man.


=== Blackout! 2 & Reggie (2009–2010) ===
Blackout! 2 was announced in 2007 by Redman and was originally scheduled for release in 2008, but its release was pushed back a number of times due to numerous reasons. In early 2008, a remake of the Smoothe da Hustler and Trigger tha Gambler classic Broken Language was released on the internet by the duo entitled Broken Language 2008, fueling rumors of a Blackout! sequel coming soon. This rumor was further fueled by the duo while performing in Gainesville, Florida, at the University of Florida. A Blackout! LP was scheduled for a December 9, 2008, release but was recently pushed back to the first quarter of 2009. It was finally released on May 19, 2009. It debuted at number 7 on the Billboard 200, at number 2 on the Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums, at number 2 on the Top Rap Albums and digital in charted number 7 on the Digital Albums charts selling 63,000 copies in its first week. The album also charted number 10 on the Canadian Albums Chart. The album has sold 160,375 copies in the United States by December 12, 2009, according to SoundScan.
In May 2009, Redman confirmed his next solo album would come out December 2009. The title for the project is Reggie Noble "0" 9½. The title of the album was then changed to just Redman Presents... Reggie, and three singles ("Coc Back", "Oh My", and "Money on My Mind") were released. The first single "Coc Back" (which features Ready Roc) had music video filmed and released for it. But as it turns out, none of the tracks made the final cut of the album, only being promo singles. During an interview, Redman stated that Reggie Noble (Redman's own birth name), does the album, not Redman. Redman also said that there is going to be more, "poppish", type songs, rather his normal "rugged" and "hardcore" songs. After a few push backs, Redman Presents... Reggie was finally released on December 7, 2010. The first official single is "Def Jammable" and a video was released for the single. It has been confirmed that Redman will appear on a remix along with French rapper Soprano of "Tranne Te" by Italian rapper Fabri Fibra.


=== Mudface, 3Joints (2011–present) ===
In June 2013, Redman announced that his next studio album Muddy Waters 2 would be released in late 2013 via Entertainment One and he would release a mixtape to go along with it, which evolved into an EP titled Muddy Waters 2: The Preload. Redman has also confirmed work on Blackout! 3 with Method Man with recording starting summer 2012, however, recording was pushed back to late 2014. Mudface was released on November 13, 2015, with Blackout! 3 coming out after, and Method Man's long-awaited mixtape and fifth solo album directly following these projects. Method Man and Redman are also slated to be working on a long-rumored sequel to their original stoner comedy, How High. In a HipHopDX interview in February 2017, Matt "M-80" Markoff confirmed the project, revealed that the sequel will be titled Too High and that he is currently looking to acquire finances for the film. An EP called '3 Joints' was released on his Gilla House label in 2020, as further work on other albums continues.
In 2021, together with producer Chris Pinset, Redman has released "80 Barz" music video that quickly gained almost 3,000,000 views on YouTube.


== Other ventures ==


=== Acting ===
In 2001, Redman co-starred with Method Man in the stoner comedy film How High, which featured the pair playing two marijuana-addled students attempting to survive at Harvard.
Redman played a major role in the horror film Seed of Chucky.
Method Man and Redman also appear in Def Jam Vendetta, Def Jam: Fight for NY and Def Jam: Icon video games, often as tag team partners, and briefly had their own television sitcom, Method & Red, on Fox during the 2003–2004 season.
In the music video for the Offspring's single "Original Prankster", Redman plays the part of the "conscience", telling the "Original Prankster" what pranks to pull.
In 2004, Redman again co-starred with Method Man in the Nickelodeon cartoon, The Fairly OddParents, in School's Out! The Musical, rapping the "Pixes Rap".


=== Fashion ===
In April 2015, Redman released a collaboration with New York-based streetwear brand Mighty Healthy. The 420-themed collection includes jerseys, T-shirts, hats, and other items with cannabis-related graphics.


=== Hosting ===
In August 2017, it was announced that Redman would host the first season of VH1's Scared Famous, which premiered on October 23, 2017.


== Personal life ==
Redman was born in Newark, New Jersey, to Darlene and Eddie Noble. His sister Rosalyn Noble is rapper known as Roz. She has appeared on several Redman songs over the years. He is a cousin of rapper Tame One.
In 2001, Redman appeared on an episode of MTV Cribs and showcased his Staten Island home which, in contrast to the luxurious homes usually featured in the series, was described by XXL magazine as "small and grimey". Speaking to Fresh Pair, Redman explained that MTV had already picked out a few houses for him to make his appearance in, but Redman did not want to appear fake, and insisted the episode be aired at his actual residence. The TV crew had to be reduced to two people because that was the only number of people that could fit in his house.The episode, which featured the crew having to pinch two wires together because the house lacked a doorbell, and a cameo by Redman's cousin Mr. Cream (formerly known as Sugar Bear) sleeping on the floor in a comforter, has become "the most infamous, most cited" episode of the show according to MTV VP of programming Nina L. Diaz. According to a 2017 interview, Redman still lived in the property and was quoted as saying "It's real small. Two bedrooms. [...] I wouldn't know what to do with a big house".Redman began boarding his four-month-old pit bull terrier Daddy with dog trainer Cesar Millan, with Millan ultimately becoming Daddy's "right-hand-man" on his TV show The Dog Whisperer.


== Discography ==


== Filmography ==


=== Film ===


=== Television ===


=== Video games ===


== Awards and nominations ==
Redman has been winner for one MOBO Awards:

MOBO Awards
2003, Best Video "Dirrty" w/ Christina Aguilera (winner)Redman has been nominated for two Grammys:

Grammy Awards
2003, Best Pop Collaboration w/ Vocals "Dirrty" w/ Christina Aguilera (nominated)
2001, Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group "Ooh" w/ De La Soul (nominated)


== References ==


== External links ==
Official Redman Site – Def Jam Records
Redman at IMDb
Redman at the Adult Film Database
Redman Music VideosCorey Isiah Christie (born August 24, 1977), better known as Reks (styled in all caps as REKS), is an American rapper. Reks emerged from Lawrence, Massachusetts' underground rap scene. His debut underground album, Along Came The Chosen, was released on Brick Records in 2001. Reks has released eight additional albums and has appeared on various albums and mixtapes.


== Early career ==
Reks was a breakdancer in his teens and was part of a local B-boy crew called Funk Town Connection. By the time he entered college at University of Massachusetts Amherst, Reks had built a reputation for himself in the local Boston rap scene, and eventually quit school to begin recording for Brick Records. A few 12" singles, "I Could Have Done More" and "Fearless," arrived first in early 2001, before Brick issued his debut LP, Along Came the Chosen, later that year. This earned Reks nominations for Hip-Hop Album and Artist of the Year by the Boston Music Awards. Reks worked with DJ Premier, Styles P, Alchemist, Hi-Tek, and many others on his 2011 album Rhythmatic Eternal King Supreme. On October 14, 2016 he released the critically acclaimed album "The Greatest X"


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===
2001: Along Came the Chosen
2003: Rekless
2005: Happy Holidays
2008: Grey Hairs
2009: More Grey Hairs
2011: Rhythmatic Eternal King Supreme
2012: Straight, No Chaser
2012: REBELutionary
2013: Revolution Cocktail
2014: Eyes Watching God
2016: The Greatest X
2018: Order In Chaos
2020: T.H.I.N.G.S. (The Hunger Inside Never Gets Satisfied)


=== EPs ===
Skills 101 / Science of Life / Final Four (Brick Records 2000)
DJ Shame / Dead Prez / Reks & Virtuoso – No More Re-Mixes Vol 1: Behind Enemy Lines / The Setup (Raptivism 2000)
I Could Have Done More / In Who We Trust / Healthy Habitat (Raptivism 2000)
Fearless/ Skills 201 / My City (Brick Records 2001)
Easy / Easy (remix) / Beantown to Cali (Brick Records 2001)
Soul Supreme /Reks – Queen (Hip-Hop)/Still Searchin (Grit 2002)
Say Goodnight / Big Dreamers (Lawtown Remix) (Showoff Records/Brick Records 2008)


=== Guest appearances ===
08. "Drunk & High" with (Termanology, & N.O.R.E.) on (Cameo King III)
"Way it Goes" with Mr. Green & Lucky Dice (2017, single)
"Red or Blue Pill" with Rec Riddles on "Brilliant but Disturbed" (2016)
"C.T.D." with Finnish rap duo "JXO" (2018)
"Daddy's Guitar" with TooBusy on "Red Tape" (2020)
"Written In Stone" feat Suave-Ski [Produced by Fuzzy Ed] 2022 (Mythology)


=== Mixtapes ===
2010: In Between the Lines
2011: In Between the Lines 2
2014: All Eyes on Reks


== Awards ==
2011 Best Indie Album [UMA]


=== Nominations ===
Album of the Year 2011 (Boston Music Awards)
Hip Hop Artist of the Year 2011 (Boston Music Awards)
The UMA Male Artist of the Year 2011
Indie Album of the Year 2011


== References ==


== External links ==
Official websiteSalaam Remi Gibbs (born May 14, 1972) is an American record producer. He is most known for producing material for close associates Nas, Amy Winehouse, and Jazmine Sullivan, but has also produced for other mainstream acts including Alicia Keys, Fugees, Doja Cat, Miguel, Fergie, Alessia Cara, Nelly Furtado, and Estelle, among others. Gibbs is noted for his reggae-tinged (often referred to as "broken-bottle") approach to production.
With 10 Grammy Award nominations, Gibbs was awarded his first in 2022 for his production on The United States vs. Billie Holiday soundtrack (2021).


== Biography ==


=== Early life and career beginnings ===
Salaam Remi Gibbs was born in Queens, New York to a Trinidadian and Barbadian father, studio musician Van Joseph Gibbs. Remi first appeared on record as the keyboard player on Kurtis Blow's 1986 release Kingdom Blow. In the late 1980s, Remi began mixing records. His first full production was in 1992, for the hip-hop group Zhigge. He worked with the Fugees and Black Sheep.
Salaam Remi has been associated with releases like Lil' Flip's "I Need Mine", Ini Kamoze's "Here Comes the Hotstepper", The Fugees' multi-platinum The Score LP,  and Toni Braxton's "You're Makin' Me High". He produced 10 tracks on the 2002 UK sensation Ms. Dynamite's album titled A Little Deeper, including the hugely successful lead single "Dy-Na-Mi-Tee", which had moderate crossover success in the U.S. market.
Remi contributed tracks to Jurassic 5's 2006 LP Feedback and Nas's 2006 album Hip Hop Is Dead, and racked up production credits on Frank, the platinum debut from North London soul-jazz singer Amy Winehouse. He worked on Winehouse's followup, Back to Black, and was producing her third album that was to be released in 2011, up until her death. Remi worked with Nelly Furtado on her first Spanish language album, Mi Plan. His projects in late 2008 included working with Jazmine Sullivan, Nas, Leona Lewis and Corinne Bailey Rae.
Remi has also done film work. He worked on the soundtracks for Office Space, Zoolander, The Departed, Blood Diamond, and Sex and the City.  He also scored the Mike Tyson documentary, TYSON, worked as executive music producer on After the Sunset and Rush Hour 3, and was music supervisor and composer for a 2008 TV pilot called Blue Blood. Salaam Remi was nominated for Non-Classical Producer of the Year at the 55th Grammy Awards, an award won by Dan Auerbach.


=== Louder Than Life ===
In 2013, Remi started his own label imprint, Louder Than Life, as a subsidiary of Sony Music, with two subimprints, Re Mi Fa Music and Flying Buddha Records. New York: A Love Story by Mack Wilds was the first release under Remi's label. Since 2013, Remi has released multiple projects under Louder Than Life including BoxTalk with Joell Ortiz, Northside of Linden, Westside of Slauson with Terrace Martin, and Black On Purpose featuring performances by Busta Rhymes, Nas, Jennifer Hudson, Black Thought, CeeLo Green, Mumu Fresh, Doug E. Fresh, Bilal (American singer), Teedra Moses, D-Nice, Mack Wilds, Common (rapper), Case (singer), Betty Wright, James Poyser, Stephen Marley (musician), Anthony Hamilton (musician), Syleena Johnson, Super Cat, Spragga Benz, and Chronixx.


== Awards and nominations ==


=== Ivor Novello Awards ===


=== Grammy Awards ===


== Production discography ==


== Filmography ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Salaam Remi at AllMusic
Profile, hiphopdx.com; accessed November 29, 2015.Moshe Reuven Sheradsky (Hebrew: משה ראובן), known professionally as Moshe Reuven, is an American rabbi, Billboard-charting artist, singer, rapper, songwriter, writer, Forbes 30 Under 30 entrepreneur, executive, and public speaker.
Sheradsky first received recognition in music when his debut single went viral on several social media and streaming platforms. Following the release of his debut, "You Are Not Alone", he signed to Create Music Group. The single managed to reach charts in five different countries, including becoming a Billboard certified single in the US. 
Sheradsky is a Hasidic Jew and is one of four Orthodox Jews in history to have signed to a major international music label.


== Early life ==
Sheradsky was born and raised in Hollywood, Florida. At a young age he was mainly known amongst family and friends for his abilities in basketball and math. Sheradsky wrote his first song at the age of 8 as a form of self-expression. In high school, he began making music with his friends and recorded his first songs with Mr. Cheeks’s former producer, Hayden. It was during his later years in high school and the beginning of college, at The University of Central Florida, that Sheradsky began to seek a more spiritual path, delving more deeply into Orthodox Judaism. Throughout his late teens and college years, Sheradsky began devoting time daily to prayer and Torah study. He received mentorship from various rabbis. Eventually, Sheradsky received his rabbinic ordination at the Rabbinical College of America in 2021, after spending multiple years studying in various yeshivas in America and Israel.


== Career ==


=== Writing and business ===
Sheradsky's first writings were published in The Huffington Post in 2017, and he made his first contribution to Forbes in 2018. In 2018 he joined the Forbes Technology Council and Young Entrepreneurs Council, invite-only councils for founders and executives in companies worth $1M or more. Sheradsky was primarily invited due to having been at the head of multiple technology startups, including his own, Wedu, that had reached $1M+ in revenue or capital raise, as either a founder, chief executive officer or CMO. He's been a founding member of three startups that have reached the $1M+ range for either metrics. From 2020 to 2021, he contributed as a writer for Entrepreneur magazine.In 2018, inspired by the teachings of the Lubavitcher Rebbe, Sheradsky began writing on topics of chassidus for Thrive Global and Live Kabbalah, as well on social media. He was appointed to this position after the founder of Live Kabbalah read his writings in Huffington Post and saw that he had a talent for blending Chassidic teachings with practical life. He quickly amassed a following, primarily on Instagram, sharing from Chassidus and regular day-to-day life via quotes and music. He became the only Hasidic Jew and rabbi on the platform to surpass 1 million followers.


=== Music career ===
In 2020, Sheradsky released his debut single, "You Are Not Alone". The song was aimed at helping those dealing with issues during the COVID-19 pandemic. The song had a local and international impact, with signs being placed alongside roads as a reminder to drivers, stating "You Are Not Alone". Over a year after its release, the song became a Billboard-certified single as part of a compilation that reached No. 22 on the Billboard charts for digital album sales.The success of "You Are Not Alone" caught the attention of a record executive at Create Music Group. He was then connected with their team's A&R reps, who concluded that they should sign him. Upon signing his first record deal, Sheradsky became the fourth Orthodox Jew to sign to a top record label, alongside Matisyahu, Alex Clare, and Shulem Lemmer. He's the only Orthodox Jew currently active on a top record label, with the others not actively releasing music with the labels they had signed to whether due to contracts running out or other reasons.In 2022, Sheradsky released the song "Say" with Julian Marley. Rolling Stone included Sheradsky in their Global Artist Spotlight, highlighting the song. Throughout the latter half of 2022, Sheradsky performed shows with as many as 3,000 and 5,000 people attending, as well as giving private performances throughout the United States. Sheradsky and Marley performed together in Florida for the first time in mid-December. In the same year, Sheradsky was included in the Forbes 30 Under 30 list. In August, Rolling Stone included Moshe in their Global Artists Spotlight List for 2022. In 2023, he additionally became a member of the Recording Academy.


== Discography ==


=== Singles ===
2020: "You Are Not Alone"
2022: "Say" (ft. Julian Marley)
2022: "Kids"
2022: "Wonderer"
2022: "The Flame"
2023: "Holding Up My Hands"


== Awards and nominations ==


== References ==


== External links ==
"Moshe Reuven youtube channel'"Trevor George Smith Jr. (born May 20, 1972), known professionally as Busta Rhymes, is an American rapper, singer, songwriter, record producer and actor. Chuck D of Public Enemy gave him the moniker Busta Rhymes, after NFL and CFL wide receiver George "Buster" Rhymes. He has received 12 Grammy Award nominations for his work, making him one of the most-nominated artists without winning.
Busta Rhymes was an original member of Leaders of the New School, a group that attracted national attention when they opened on tour for Public Enemy. He gained exposure for their guest appearance on A Tribe Called Quest's track "Scenario". Shortly thereafter, the group broke up, leading Rhymes to become a sought after solo artist, appearing on numerous tracks for other artists before his solo debut album, The Coming (1996). The album reached the top ten on the Billboard 200 album chart, was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA), and earned him a Grammy nomination.
He has released ten total solo albums, with the most recent being 2020's Extinction Level Event 2: The Wrath of God. Rhymes' list of hit singles include "Woo-Hah!! Got You All in Check", "It's a Party", "Put Your Hands Where My Eyes Could See", "Dangerous", "Turn It Up" (Remix)/"Fire It Up", "Gimme Some More", "What's It Gonna Be?", "Pass the Courvoisier, Part II", "I Know What You Want" and "Touch It".
Among his other ventures, he founded the record label Conglomerate (initially Flipmode Entertainment) and the production crew The Conglomerate (formerly Flipmode Squad). About.com included him on its list of the 50 Greatest MCs of Our Time (1987–2007), and Steve Huey of AllMusic called him one of the best and most prolific rappers of the 1990s. In 2012, The Source placed him on its list of the Top 50 Lyricists of All Time. MTV has called him "one of hip-hop's greatest visual artists".


== Early life ==
Busta Rhymes was born Trevor George Smith Jr. in the East Flatbush neighborhood of Brooklyn on May 20, 1972, to Geraldine Green and Trevor Smith Sr., both from Jamaica. At age 12, Smith's family moved to Uniondale, New York. For a short while, Smith attended George Westinghouse Career and Technical Education High School in Brooklyn with future rappers Christopher "The Notorious B.I.G." Wallace and Shawn "Jay-Z" Carter, and attended Samuel J. Tilden High School with Edward "Special Ed" Archer and Roderick "Chip Fu" Roachford of Fu-Schnickens. Smith eventually graduated from Long Island's Uniondale High School in 1991.Busta also spent time in Britain during the early 1980s where he resided with his maternal aunt. She lived in Morecambe, and he spent two summers there with his mother and younger brother. He went to Skerton Community High School while he was staying in the area. He told GQ in a 2020 interview, "One summer when we went down there I was 12, my brother was eight, so my aunt made sure that we actually went to school in England. Regular school and then we went to karate school too. We also were on some breakdancing that was so crazy, we ended up actually getting work to breakdance in clubs as minors. And our cousins used to run us around and they used to advertise us as TJ and Paul."


== Career ==


=== 1986–1995: Leaders of the New School and rising popularity ===
In 1986, Smith, alongside fellow Long Island natives Charlie Brown (born Bryan Higgins), Dinco D (born James Jackson) and Cut Monitor Milo (born Sheldon Scott), formed the East Coast hip hop group Leaders of the New School. The group's big break was when they became an opening act for hip hop group Public Enemy. Public Enemy's Chuck D gave Busta Rhymes and Charlie Brown their respective stage names. Leaders of the New School began recording in late 1990 and released their debut album A Future Without a Past... in 1991 on Elektra Records. In early 1992, the group appeared on A Tribe Called Quest's posse cut "Scenario". In 1993, they released T.I.M.E. (The Inner Mind's Eye). Smith gained popularity from his advanced rhymes as well as his unique style that was not common of many New York rap artists at the time. Raised by two Jamaican parents, Smith embraced his heritage in his music and image as an artist. Smith was the only member of the group to wear dreads and use Jamaican slang, or patois, in his raps. Smith's unique style added an element to the group that allowed for rapid success. Soon after, however, internal problems arose because of his increasing popularity, and the group broke up on the set of Yo! MTV Raps.By the summer of 1992, Rhymes began making guest appearances on songs by several artists such as Big Daddy Kane, Another Bad Creation, The Notorious B.I.G., Brand Nubian, A Tribe Called Quest, and KRS-One, as well on the interludes to Mary J. Blige's debut What's the 411? and R&B trio TLC's second album CrazySexyCool. He also appeared on the album jacket of fellow hip-hop group A Tribe Called Quest's Midnight Marauders, with a host of other fellow hip-hop pioneers. In early 1993, he appeared in a cameo role in Who's the Man? with his fellow Leaders of the New School group members. The same year, he appeared as part of an ensemble cast in the Forest Whitaker-directed Strapped, which also starred rapper and actor Fredro and Bokeem Woodbine and co-starred alongside Ice Cube and Omar Epps in the John Singleton film Higher Learning.
In mid-1994, Rhymes continued to make guest appearances such as the single "Oh My God" with A Tribe Called Quest, he teamed with Puff Daddy, LL Cool J, Rampage and former classmate The Notorious B.I.G., on a remix to Craig Mack's song "Flava in Ya Ear", soon after he would team up again with The Notorious B.I.G. with rappers such as Bone Thugs-n-Harmony and Coolio on a posse cut, "The Points" which appeared on the soundtrack to the 1995 film Panther. At this time, Rhymes engaged in a freestyle battle rap with Ol' Dirty Bastard, rapping the first few verses of his future breakout debut single "Woo-Hah!!" in early 1995. Rhymes also worked on unreleased material with artists such as Nas and Mary J. Blige. Some or neither of the collaborations came to fruition, and Rhymes begun recording what would be his debut studio album in late 1995.


=== 1995–1999: The Coming, When Disaster Strikes, and Extinction Level Event: The Final World Front ===
In the summer of 1995, Busta Rhymes began working on his solo debut album The Coming, and a month after recording was completed, he released it in March 1996. A month before the album was released, he broke out with a hit single, "Woo Hah!! Got You All in Check". Later, he started work on his second album, When Disaster Strikes, which would not be released until September 1997. It produced the hit singles "Put Your Hands Where My Eyes Could See" and "Fire It Up". His musical journey saw him become one of the most successful and high net worth rappers in the United States.In 1998, Busta Rhymes recorded Extinction Level Event: The Final World Front. Its lead single "Gimme Some More" — which sampled Bernard Herrmann's theme from Psycho — reached No. 6 in the UK singles chart in January 1999. Busta Rhymes enjoyed further transatlantic success in April, when the single "What's It Gonna Be?!", featuring Janet Jackson, reached the US and UK Top 11. The album received prominent notice for featuring the fastest rapping Busta Rhymes has performed, particularly on a song called "Iz They Wildin Wit Us?", featuring a guest appearance by Mystikal.That same year, the Flipmode Squad released their group album, and from there, they continued to collaborate.


=== 2000–2004: Anarchy, Genesis, and It Ain't Safe No More ===

In 2000, Busta Rhymes recorded his final album for Elektra, titled Anarchy. After Busta signed to J Records, a label started by the then recently ousted Arista Records chief and founder Clive Davis, he released a greatest hits collection Total Devastation: The Best of Busta Rhymes, alongside an album of original work. Continuing the Biblical theme of his previous albums, he titled his record Genesis. The album featured collaborations with Mary J. Blige, P. Diddy, Kelis, and others. Genesis was powered by "What It Is", the hit single with Kelis, and "Break Ya Neck", his solo single released in November 2001. The final single was the summer smash "Pass the Courvoisier, Part II", which featured Pharrell and P. Diddy. Despite the success of the two singles, this album did not sell as well as previous releases. Fellow Flipmode members were featured, but minor changes in the roster were noted.
In 2002, Busta Rhymes released his sixth studio album It Ain't Safe No More. The album was moderately successful, with a hit song featuring Mariah Carey and the Flipmode Squad titled "I Know What You Want". Another hit single was "Make It Clap", featuring Spliff Star. The remix of "Make It Clap", features Sean Paul. After its release, Busta Rhymes left J Records. In 2004, he signed with American record producer and record executive Dr. Dre's Aftermath Entertainment, through Interscope Records. Consequently, upon changing label, a Flipmode album was cancelled and shelved. As a side note, Busta was featured as a playable fighter in the 2004 fighting game Def Jam: Fight For NY.


=== 2005–2009: The Big Bang and Back on My B.S. ===
His seventh studio album, titled The Big Bang, became the first No. 1 album of his career. The album sold over 209,000 copies in its first week to earn the top spot on the US Billboard 200. The album also became his highest-charting album in the UK, peaking at No. 19. Some of the album was previously leaked online, and as a result several songs were left off the album and new ones added. The Big Bang features production by Dr. Dre and Swizz Beatz, as well as appearances by Raekwon and Nas. The album spawned the singles "Touch It", "I Love My Bitch", featuring Kelis and will.i.am, "New York Shit", featuring Swizz Beatz and "In The Ghetto". Busta Rhymes also had a stint opening for Mariah Carey's The Adventures of Mimi Tour. Also, he has performed with Eminem on "Touch It Remix Part 5" and who also performed a verse on the aforementioned rapper's song, "I'll Hurt You". On July 17, 2008, Busta left Interscope and Aftermath due to a creative clash with Interscope head Jimmy Iovine.
In 2007, Busta Rhymes released the song "We Made It" featuring Linkin Park. He also made an original song, "Where's My Money", for a fictional radio station in the 2008 video game Grand Theft Auto IV. It was later revealed that Busta signed a deal with Universal Motown, through which he released his eighth studio album Back on My B.S., on May 19, 2009. The album debuted at No. 5 on the Billboard 200. The album was supported by the singles "Arab Money", featuring Ron Browz, "Hustler's Anthem '09", featuring T-Pain and "Respect My Conglomerate". The song "World Go Round", featuring British singer Estelle, was released in France on April 6, 2009, due to the heavy rotation of a leaked version. The single was released in the UK on July 13, 2009. Busta Rhymes also appeared on Asher Roth's debut album Asleep in the Bread Aisle.
Due to controversial content, the United Arab Emirates has banned the album. Back on My B.S. was released internationally, but because of one song, "Arab Money", it cannot be purchased as a CD there, although the album can still be purchased via iTunes. According to the National Media Council, the lyrics were considered to be offensive to Arabs and to Islam because it quoted the Shahada.
In November 2008, when "Arab Money" was released as a single, DJ Dany Neville and the Iraqi rapper The Narcicyst responded by recording a reply. Rhymes later apologized. DJs in the country said they had not received an order banning the record from being spun in nightclubs, and they had mixed feelings on whether the record was offensive or not. DJ Saif of Dubai sai "I don't play 'Arab Money' because it's disrespectful [to] Arabs. I don't think there is a ban on playing it in clubs, but many here don't play it anyway."
DJ Bliss, along with many other DJs in the UAE, refused to play "Arab Money" on Radio 1 in Dubai after it was banned in the UAE for offense to Arabs. He added, "I used to play the original version in the club, but out of respect for the laws here in my country, I haven't played it since." In 2010 the track's producer Ron Browz defended Busta Rhymes in a Dubai interview with journalist Awad Mustafa stating that the track was misunderstood. "For us, having 'Arab money' is a compliment understood like having 'Oprah money' or 'Tiger Woods money' – it's just street slang, and we were appreciating the amazing wonders that have been created here," Browz said. Browz added that he had produced the track in a moment of inspiration while experimenting in his studio. "Growing up in Harlem I was always surrounded by Arabs and Muslims, we embraced their culture and they embraced ours and we always joked with each other," he said.


=== 2010–present: Collaborations and Extinction Level Event 2 ===
In September 2009, Busta Rhymes had announced that he was working on his ninth studio album, alongside Canadian producer Boi-1da, titled The Chemo. At the time, he stated that the project was 80% finished. In May 2010, Busta Rhymes had reportedly changed the title of his ninth album from The Chemo to Extinction Level Event 2, making his ninth effort a sequel to his 1998 album Extinction Level Event (Final World Front).In an August 6, 2010 interview on Conspiracy Worldwide Radio, American hip hop producer DJ Premier said Busta Rhymes received over eight beats which he did not want to use but Premier hoped his next beat would be chosen for inclusion on the album. On DJ Premier's Live from Headqcourterz radio show, Premier confirmed that one of his beats were to be included in E.L.E. 2. In 2010, Busta Rhymes formed his new label, The Conglomerate Entertainment (later on, the label would have artists such as N.O.R.E., and Spliff Star on its roster). He was also featured on "C'mon (Catch 'Em By Surprise)" by Tiësto and Diplo.
In 2011, Rhymes recorded "Look at Me Now" with Chris Brown and Lil Wayne on Brown's fourth album, F.A.M.E.; the song received favorable reviews regarding Rhymes guest verse on the song, and is his highest chart entry on the Billboard Hot 100, peaking at No. 6, while reaching No. 1 on the Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart, becoming his first No. 1 on that chart. On September 7, 2011, Rhymes received six nominations for the BET Hip Hop Awards, held on October 11, 2011.
On May 1, 2011, Rhymes appeared on the launch show for MNET's Big Brother Africa 6: Amplified and performed some of his songs. In 2011, Busta Rhymes performed at the Gathering of the Juggalos. Busta Rhymes contributed to the 2011 Tech N9ne album All 6's and 7's, performing vocals on the single, "Worldwide Choppers", released on May 31. Canadian recording artist Justin Bieber featured Busta Rhymes on a song called "Drummer Boy" off Bieber's sophomore studio album Under the Mistletoe, released on November 1, 2011. On November 11, 2011, a Heavy D tribute song titled "You Ain't Gotta Wait Till I'm Gone" was leaked.On November 16, 2011, it was announced that Busta Rhymes signed to Cash Money Records. For his debut single on the Cash Money label and his Conglomerate Records, he reunited with Chris Brown on the single "Why Stop Now". In 2012, Busta collaborated with Jodie Connor, featuring on her single "Take You There", but he did not appear in the music video.
A song with Twista, titled "Can You Keep Up", was leaked. Busta Rhymes was featured on Fat Joe's single "Pride & Joy" alongside Kanye West and Jadakiss. His ninth studio album, Year of the Dragon, was released for free on Google Play on August 21, 2012. The album features guest appearances from Lil Wayne, Rick Ross, Trey Songz, Robin Thicke, Maino, Gucci Mane and more. He also released a music video for the track "Doin' It Again" which features Reek da Villian and includes a tribute to his manager Chris Lighty, who committed suicide in 2012.He was later featured on YMCMB label mate Shannel's single "Last Time". In 2011, it was announced that Universal Motown was going defunct, forcing Rhymes and other artists to move to Universal Republic Records. In mid-2012, it was announced that Universal Republic Records was also going defunct, forcing artists on the roster to move to Republic Records, reviving the label.On December 21, 2012, members of The Conglomerate Ent., Busta along with J. Doe and Reek da Villan released a mixtape titled Catastrophic, their first collective effort. Busta Rhymes collaborated with Pharrell Williams, who produced the first single off his Cash Money Records debut, "Twerk It", which was released June 6, 2013. A video was shot in Flatbush on June 3, 2013. The official remix was released featuring Nicki Minaj. On July 23, 2014, Busta Rhymes announced that he left Cash Money Records due to creative differences and he is no longer on Republic. On November 7, 2013, he released "Thank You", a song featuring Q-Tip, Kanye West and Lil Wayne.
He was featured on "Devil", featuring Neon Hitch and B.o.B, a song by Cash Cash. It was released in August 2015. In July 2014, it was announced that Rhymes had amicably departed Cash Records due to creative differences.
In 2016, a movement to name a small, uninhabited lake island in Shrewsbury, Massachusetts after Busta Rhymes received viral publicity. The unofficial name of Busta Rhymes Island was chosen by a town resident because the island has "rope-swinging, blueberries, and ... stuff Busta would enjoy". A formal proposal was made to the U.S. Board on Geographic Names to officially change the island's name, but it was not accepted due to regulations regarding the naming of geographic places after living people.Busta Rhymes was also a featured artist on The Hamilton Mixtape, singing a remix of "My Shot", along with Black Thought of The Roots and Joell Ortiz. The trio performed the song on The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon. On February 2, 2018, Rhymes released a new single "Get It", featuring Missy Elliott and Kelly Rowland, through Epic Records. In 2018, he was announced to be a featured artist on Azealia Banks’ album Fantasea II: The Second Wave, on the song "Tastes State".
In February 2019, Busta Rhymes confirmed he's "finishing touches" of his new album with longtime collaborator, Dr. Dre.In 2020, Busta appeared on season 4 of The Masked Singer as the "Dragon". He was eliminated in the first episode.On October 30, 2020, Busta released his album Extinction Level Event 2: The Wrath of God, featuring Kendrick Lamar, Rakim, Mariah Carey, Q-Tip, Mary J. Blige, and M.O.P., among others.


== Personal life ==
Busta Rhymes identifies as a member of the Five-Percent Nation. He has six children: three sons (born in 1993, 1999, and 2001) and three daughters (born 1998, 1999, and 2006).During an interview for Hip-Hop: Beyond Beats and Rhymes, the rapper walked out when confronted with a question about homophobia in the rap community. Rhymes is quoted as saying: "I can't partake in that conversation," followed by "With all due respect, I ain't trying to offend nobody...We don't support abomination or un-natural stuff." When asked if the hip hop culture would accept a homosexual rapper, Busta Rhymes then exited the interview.In a later interview with MTV News, Busta Rhymes believes marriage is between a man and woman.


== Legal issues ==
In December 1998, Rhymes was arrested and charged with possession of an unregistered gun after being pulled over during a routine traffic stop in New York City. In October 6, 2000, he received five years probation after pleading guilty earlier in the year.
On August 20, 2006, Rhymes was arrested and arraigned for charges of third-degree assault after attacking a man who reportedly spat on his car in New York City on August 12 after the AmsterJam Music Festival on Randall's Island.On October 24, 2006, Rhymes appeared at Manhattan Criminal Court as the district attorney's office attempted to amend previous charges against him to include weapons possession for a machete found in his car. The judge refused to add the charge and adjourned the case.On February 20, 2007, Rhymes refused a plea deal offered by the prosecutor's office for the assault of his former driver, Edward Hatchett. The deal would have entailed his being in jail for six months and pleading guilty to two assaults, the attack on Hatchett, and the attack on the former fan. The dispute with Hatchett is believed to have originated over back pay Hatchett felt he was owed. Manhattan Criminal Court Judge Becki Rowe offered Busta another option, pleading guilty to third-degree assault. The conditions of the proposed sentence would include five days of community service, two weeks of youth lectures and six months of anger management classes, as well as three years of probation.On May 3, 2007, Rhymes was arrested in Manhattan for driving without a license and for driving while impaired. On March 18, 2008, a judge in New York City sentenced Rhymes to three years of probation, 10 days community service, $1250 in fines (plus court costs), and to enroll in a drunken driving program.On September 25, 2008, Rhymes was temporarily refused entry to the UK due to "unresolved convictions".In 2018 Busta Rhymes was accused of plagiarism by Bernardo Lanzetti and his group Acqua Fragile because in ''Genesis'', the song that gives the title to his 2001 album, he used a sample of ''Cosmic mind affair'', taken from ''Mass Media Stars'', the group's second album, without declaring it and indeed signing it in his own name. Lanzetti and the group decide to continue the cause; the usage of the sample is approximately 20.09 seconds and is repeated 4 times within Genesis for a usage percentage of approximately 35% of the total duration of the song. Furthermore, the name of the original producer of Cosmic mind affair, Claudio Fabi, also disappears from the rapper's album, because J Dilla is listed in this role in the credits. Since after years of negotiations the situation was not resolved with recognition, Lanzetti and the band decided to take legal action


== Influences ==
Busta Rhymes' favorite rapper as a teenager was LL Cool J, who was the inspiration and reason for Busta Rhymes writing his first raps.


== Legacy ==
Rhymes' work has influenced artists such as Eminem, Talib Kweli, Ski Mask the Slump God, Kendrick Lamar, Tyler, the Creator, and Doja Cat. Fellow American rapper Big Daddy Kane has stated that Rhymes has the best flow in hip hop, alluding to the original version of "Turn It Up".


== Discography ==

Studio albumsThe Coming (1996)
When Disaster Strikes... (1997)
Extinction Level Event: The Final World Front (1998)
Anarchy (2000)
Genesis (2001)
It Ain't Safe No More... (2002)
The Big Bang (2006)
Back on My B.S. (2009)
Year of the Dragon (2012)
Extinction Level Event 2: The Wrath of God (2020)
Blockbusta (2023)Collaborative albumsA Future Without a Past... as part of the Leaders of the New School (1991)
T.I.M.E. (The Inner Mind's Eye) as part of the Leaders of the New School (1993)
The Imperial as part of the Flipmode Squad (1998)


== Filmography ==


=== Film ===


=== Television ===


== Video games ==
Def Jam Fight For NY (2004) as Magic
Def Jam Fight for NY: The Takeover (2006) as Magic
Grand Theft Auto IV: The Lost and Damned (2009) as Himself


== Awards and nominations ==


== See also ==
List of artists who reached number one on the U.S. dance chart
List of number-one U.S. dance hits
List of songs recorded by Busta Rhymes


== References ==


== External links ==

Busta Rhymes discography at Discogs 
Busta Rhymes at IMDbRichard Lawson (born December 24, 1969, in Jamaica), known professionally as DJ Daddy Rich or DJ Richie Rich, is an American record producer and turntablist who was best known as a member of the New York-based rap trio 3rd Bass. He was part of The "Supermen" DJ crew which also included other top DJs such as Scratch, Clark Kent, Miz, Supreme, and Alladin. Rich also appeared in the movie "Juice" in the DJ battle scene, and recorded the scratches for the soundtrack. While working with 3rd Bass, he was one of the first DJs ever to do a DJ trick routine on TV when they appeared on The Arsenio Hall Show.
Larson attended Farmingdale State College.


== Biography ==
With MC Serch and Pete Nice, Lawson formed the rap group 3 the Hard Way, which became 3rd Bass, in 1988. After releasing two albums in 1989 and 1991, the group split in 1992. Rich and Pete Nice collaborated on their only release together, the 1993 album Dust to Dust, which peaked at #171 on the Billboard 200, #50 on the Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums and #3 on the Top Heatseekers.Rich produced the track "I'm Kurious" for Kurious Jorge's 1994 debut, A Constipated Monkey, before leaving the music business. He resurfaced briefly in 1999 on The Madd Rapper's album Tell 'Em Why U Madd, providing scratches for the single "Dot Vs. TMR."


== Discography ==


=== 3rd Bass ===
The Cactus Album, 1989
Cactus Revisited, 1990
Derelicts of Dialect, 1991


=== With Pete Nice ===
Dust to Dust, 1993


=== Production ===
"I'm Kurious" from the Kurious album A Constipated Monkey, 1994
"Dot Vs. TMR" from The Madd Rapper album Tell 'Em Why U Madd, 1999


== References ==Richard Anthony Simpson (born May 28, 1968), also known as Chubb Rock, is an American rapper who released several successful hip hop albums in the late 1980s and early 1990s. A National Merit Scholar, Chubb Rock dropped out of Brown University to pursue his musical career.


== 1990s and earlier ==
Discovered and produced by his first cousin DJ-Producer Howie Tee, Chubb Rock first appeared on the national scene with his 1988 self-titled debut Chubb Rock and 1989's And the Winner is... The latter produced the minor hit "Ya Bad Chubbs" which garnered air play on Yo! MTV Raps during that time.
His 1990 release entitled The One reached No. 13 on Billboard's Top Hip-Hop/R&B chart for that year. Three singles from that release, "Treat 'Em Right", "Just The Two of Us" and "The Chubbster", made it to No. 1 on Billboard's Top Rap Singles chart list for the same year.The following year saw the release of I Gotta Get Mine, Yo, a release that featured guest performances from Grand Puba Maxwell and Poke. This release also helped fledgling music producers Trackmasters, on their rise to prominence, as the group handled production duties on the recording. Chubb Rock also made an appearance on MC Serch's 1992 song "Back to the Grill."
Chubb Rock was a member of the 1995 incarnation of the Crooklyn Dodgers, a hip hop act that also featured OC and Jeru the Damaja. His backup dancers started another group, A.T.E.E.M, which released its debut, A Hero Ain't Nothin' But A Sandwich, in 1992 on Select Records.
In 1996, he appeared on the Red Hot Organization's compilation album America is Dying Slowly, alongside Wu-Tang Clan, Coolio, and Fat Joe, among others.  The album, meant to raise awareness of the AIDS epidemic among African American men, was heralded as a masterpiece by The Source magazine.


== 2000s and on ==
Chubb Rock's work in the 2000s has been limited to only a few songs. He appears on a song for Raptivism Records' "No More Prisons" project with Lil' Dap of Group Home and Ed O.G., and also worked with Mr. Len on the song "Dummy Smacks", where he says, "Some people thought I was gone... never that!" He made an appearance alongside Vast Aire on the 2007 Zimbabwe Legit album House of Stone with the song "Wake Up". In 2001 he appeared in the soundtrack for Wet Hot American Summer on the song Summer in America.
In 2008, his single "Treat 'Em Right" was ranked number 82 on VH1's 100 Greatest Songs of Hip Hop. Chubb Rock also released "Obama We Believe" in support of President Obama.  His most recent appearance was on the K'naan single "ABC's". He also collaborated with Polish rapper eMCeeM on a track for his album To dopiero poczatek.
In February 2009, the single "Back In" was released, from the album Bridging The Gap, a collaboration with Wordsmith, released on July 14, 2009.
Chubb Rock is featured in the single "Summertime Anthem" by Eric Roberson in which they filmed the music video on the streets of Bed-Stuy, Brooklyn, New York City where he credited his wife and manager, KeKe "Diamond" Simpson, for putting the duo together.Chubb Rock also released an EP in September 2011. That year, he also appeared with his childhood sweetheart and wife of 24 years, KeKe Simpson on the NBC game show The Marriage Ref.
Chubb Rock moved to Atlanta and joined a radio show hosted by Silas "SiMan Baby" Alexander on Atlanta's Majic 107.5/97.5. On October 26, 2018  they left the station and later started a syndicated afternoon radio show.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===


=== Mixtapes ===


=== Collaborative albums ===


=== Extended plays ===


=== As lead artist ===


=== Singles ===


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Chubb Rock at AllMusic
Chubb Rock ATL Magic 107.5
The Chubb Rock Show with SiMan Baby
Discogs: Chubb RockDana Stinson (born February 2, 1971), better known by his stage name Rockwilder, is an American hip hop record producer and rapper. 
A long-term friend of Def Jam rapper Redman, Rockwilder got his start producing for East Coast hip hop artists in the mid-1990s. In 1999 Rockwilder produced Method Man & Redman's hit single "Da Rockwilder".  He has produced at least one track on every Redman album since 1994's Dare Iz a Darkside.


== Biography ==
Rockwilder began his debut production on the 1994 Organized Konfusion album Stress: The Extinction Agenda & the Flatlinerz album "USA. He went on to craft records by other artists, including Jay-Z's "Do It Again (Put Ya Hands Up)" (1999), Busta Rhymes and Erykah Badu's "One" (1997), Xzibit's Front 2 Back (2000), and De La Soul's "I.C. Y'All" (2000). He also went on to work with Janet Jackson (several album tracks on All for You) and Destiny's Child (the Rockwilder Remix of "Bootylicious" as well as "If" and "Free" from Destiny Fulfilled), and was the co-producer, with Missy Elliott, of the 2001 Christina Aguilera/Lil' Kim/Mýa/Pink cover of Labelle's 1974 "Lady Marmalade" for the film Moulin Rouge! for which they received a Grammy Award. He also produced the song "Dirrty" for Aguilera featuring Redman using the original beat he produced for Redman's song "Let's Get Dirty (I Can't Get in da Club)" as a guide. In the 2000s, Rockwilder produced several tracks on Lisa "Left Eye" Lopes' Supernova (2001). The songs include "Hot" and "Rags 2 Riches". Later in 2003, he made the collaboration between couple Kelis and Nas, "In Public", being released from Kelis' Tasty.
After a string of pop-chart hits, Rockwilder went on to score the movie How High starring Redman and Method Man.
Rockwilder has founded his own record/production company (Muzicpark Entertainment). He also used to be a rapper, being part of the duo Xross-Breed with Napalm. As a duo, they appeared as guests on Redman's Muddy Waters ("Case Closed") and the Erick Sermon compilation Insomnia ("The Vibe").


== Production discography ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official Website
RocBattle.com
Interview, HitQuarters 24 Oct 2002Rakim Athelaston Mayers (born October 3, 1988), known professionally as ASAP Rocky ( AY-sap; stylized as A$AP Rocky), is an American rapper. Born and raised in Harlem, he embarked on his musical career as a member of the hip hop collective ASAP Mob, from which he adopted his moniker. In August 2011, Rocky's single "Peso" was leaked online and within weeks began receiving radio airplay. Rocky released his debut mixtape Live. Love. A$AP, later that year to widespread critical acclaim. The success of what is considered his breakout project led to a joint venture record deal with Polo Grounds Music and Sony Music's RCA Records.His debut studio album Long. Live. A$AP (2013) debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 and was later certified double platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). The album was preceded by Rocky's breakout single, "Fuckin' Problems" (featuring Drake, 2 Chainz and Kendrick Lamar), which was nominated for Best Rap Song at the 2014 Grammy Awards. In 2015, Rocky released his second album, titled At. Long. Last. A$AP. The album was Rocky's second consecutive album to debut at number one on the Billboard 200 and received mostly positive reviews from music critics. The album's single, "L$D", was nominated for Best Music Video at the 2016 Grammy Awards. In 2018, Rocky released his third album, Testing, which peaked in the top five of several countries, including the Billboard 200.
Rocky has won a BET Award, two BET Hip Hop Awards, an MTV Video Music Award Japan and an MTVU Woodie Award, as well as being nominated for two Grammy Awards, six World Music Awards, three MTV Video Music Awards and two MTV Europe Music Awards. Rocky has also directed music videos for himself, Danny Brown, and other A$AP Mob members. Furthermore, he produces records under the pseudonym Lord Flacko.


== Early life ==
Rakim Athelaston Mayers was born on October 3, 1988, in the Harlem neighborhood of Manhattan, a borough of New York City. His father is from Barbados. He has an older brother (deceased) and an older sister, Erika. Both Rakim and Erika's names are taken from the Eric B. & Rakim duo. His cousin is fellow ASAP Mob member ASAP Nast.Mayers started rapping at age nine, when he moved to Harrisburg, Pennsylvania. He learned how to rap from his older brother, who also wore the Cornrows hairdo that A$AP Rocky later adopted. When Mayers was 13, his brother was killed in Harlem. The death inspired Rocky to take rapping more seriously. Mayers grew up admiring Harlem-based rap group The Diplomats. He was also influenced by Mobb Deep, Three 6 Mafia, UGK, Run DMC, Wu-Tang Clan, and Bone Thugs-n-Harmony.When Mayers was 12 years old, his father went to jail and he spent his teenage years moving around homeless shelters with his mother and sister. After living for a period in a shelter with his mother in New York City, he moved to Midtown Manhattan. His father died in 2012.


== Career ==


=== 2007–2011: Career beginnings ===
In 2007, A$AP Rocky joined the A$AP Mob crew, a Harlem-based collective of rappers, producers, music video directors, fashion designers, and bikers who shared similar interests in music, fashion, style, and art. It had been formed by A$AP Yams, A$AP Bari and A$AP Illz. In July 2011, Rocky released his single "Purple Swag" which quickly became a street anthem in New York City.In August 2011, Rocky's single "Peso", was leaked online and within weeks received airplay on the high-profile Hot 97 New York radio station. After he released a music video for his song "Purple Swag", he received attention from several record labels. In October, he released the mixtape Live. Love. A$AP to critical acclaim. Earlier that month, he signed a two-year, $3 million record deal with Bryan Leach's Polo Grounds Music, which at the time was distributed by Clive Davis' Sony Music division of J Records. Upon his record deal, Rocky started a label, A$AP Worldwide, with A$AP Yams. However, Rocky's deal with J Records would be short-lived, when on October 7, RCA Music Group announced that it was merging J alongside Arista and Jive Records into RCA Records. With the shutdown, Rocky (and all other artists previously signed to these three labels) will release future material under the RCA brand. On December 5, he was nominated for BBC's Sound of 2012 poll.


=== 2012–2014: Touring and Long. Live. A$AP ===
In February 2012, Rocky joined Kendrick Lamar as the opening act for Drake's Club Paradise Tour. In June, SpaceGhostPurrp, founder of Miami-based collective Raider Klan and Rocky's past collaborator, accused A$AP Twelvyy of jumping Raider Klan's Matt Stoops and subsequently disassociated himself from A$AP Mob and Rocky in a YouTube video. He and Raider Klan also accused ASAP Mob of copying their style, and Rocky of using lyrics from SpaceGhostPurrp's song "My Enemy" on "Goldie". Rocky responded in a July interview for MTV, saying that SpaceGhostPurrp is "try[ing] to build hype" and told him to "stick to makin' beats".In July 2012, Rocky performed at the Pitchfork Music Festival. He was scheduled to make his network television debut on Late Night with Jimmy Fallon on July 20, but he was then arrested the night before, after an alleged involvement in a brawl, with 21-year-old artist iRome. The scuffle took place in downtown Manhattan and the performance was canceled. After it was rescheduled for August 21, Rocky performed "Goldie" on the show. On September 6, he also performed a guest rap on Rihanna's "Cockiness (Love It)" at the 2012 MTV Video Music Awards.Rocky recorded his debut studio album Long. Live. A$AP, along with several producers, such as Clams Casino, Hit-Boy, Friendzone, A$AP Ty Beats, Soufein3000 and Joey Fat Beats. "Goldie" was released as the album's first single on April 27. On August 27, his crew A$AP Mob released the mixtape Lords Never Worry as a free download. During September through November, Rocky promoted the album with the 40-date national concert tour, the Long Live ASAP Tour, with opening acts ScHoolboy Q, Danny Brown, and A$AP Mob. Long. Live. A$AP was released on January 15, 2013, to mostly positive reviews from critics. The album debuted at number one on the Billboard 200, with first-week sales of 139,000 copies in the United States. As of March 13, 2013, it has sold 284,000 copies. On March 16, 2015, Long. Live. A$AP was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA), for the shipment of 500,000 copies in the United States.On April 12, 2013, in an interview at Wild 94.9 radio station, Rocky revealed that he was working on an instrumental album, which he plans on releasing without notice. He even discussed his favorite music videos and talked about his desire to collaborate with veteran rapper André 3000. On June 21, Rocky told MTV News that he had completed his debut instrumental album, which mostly consists of ambient oriented instrumental tracks, titled Beauty & The Beast: Slowed Down Sessions (Chapter 1) and was originally set to be released during the summer for free download. However, that album was delayed with no release date announced. Rocky previewed two snippets that would have made the Beauty & The Beast: Slowed Down Sessions (Chapter 1) compilation, titled "Riot Rave" and "Unicorn". The project has not been released as of 2022.


=== 2015–2017: At. Long. Last. A$AP ===
On March 16, 2014, Rocky announced that he was working on his second studio album, entitled A.L.L.A. (an acronym for At. Long. Last. A$AP) which was a follow-up to his debut album, Long. Live. A$AP. Upon the wake of a delay of the ASAP Mob album, L.O.R.D., Rocky subsequently collaborated with cohorts A$AP Ferg, Nast and Twelvyy on the album's third single, "Hella Hoes", which was released on June 6, 2014. Nonetheless, A$AP Mob leader A$AP Yams announced on his Tumblr account that the album had been shelved.On October 3, 2014, his 26th birthday, Rocky launched a short-lived music giveaway called Flacko Jodye Season, which first premiered with "Multiply", which featured additional vocals from Juicy J; later released on iTunes one week after its premiere.On New Year's Day 2015, Rocky released his second album's lead single, "Lord Pretty Flacko Jodye 2 (LPFJ2)", a sequel to "Pretty Flacko". Then, on January 18, seventeen days after the single's release, Rocky's mentor and partner, Steven "A$AP Yams" Rodriguez, died at the age of 26. However, some reports later stated that Yams' cause was ruled acute mixed drug intoxication while Rocky and several A$AP Mob members and affiliates said that the late leader of the collective died due to his sleep apnea, which caused asphyxiation and pulmonary aspiration. Weeks after Yams' death, Rocky revealed that At. Long. Last. A$AP was executive-produced by rapper Juicy J, producer Danger Mouse, Rocky and Yams themselves.In 2015, Rocky appeared in a cameo role in the indie comedy-drama, Dope. The film premiered at the 2015 Sundance Film Festival on January 21, 2015. It opened in all movie theaters on June 12. There at the event, Rocky explained his expressions and grief over the death of his own friend and partner; performed "Multiply" on-stage as a dedication to his loving memory, minutes before running backstage to calm down.In March 2015, Rocky said in an interview with MTV News that he made songs such as "Wild For The Night" and "Fuckin' Problems" for mainstream commercial success, and that he now hated those songs.On April 8, 2015, the rapper released a song, titled "M'$", debuted during an interview with the Red Bull Music Academy, and was released on the iTunes Store two days later, however, it was announced that the song was not an official single from the album. The album, however, did include a remixed version of the track that replaced Rocky's second verse with a guest verse from Lil Wayne. On May 9, Rocky unveiled the album's cover art on his official Instagram page, with the caption "AT LONG LAST...." On the same day, he then released the album's alternative artwork and released the album's second single, titled "Everyday" featuring Rod Stewart, Miguel and Mark Ronson (the latter of which also produced the track alongside Emile Haynie). Rocky also announced that the release date for A.L.L.A. was updated to June 2, 2015; however, on May 25, 2015, around 6:00 PM EDT, the album leaked online, approximately one week before its expected release. Subsequently, Rocky tweeted to announce that the album will be released at midnight (May 26), changing the date a week early.Upon its release, At. Long. Last. A$AP received generally positive to mixed reviews from music critics. Overall, the album was supported by the release of three singles: "Lord Pretty Flacko Jodye 2 (LPFJ2)", "Everyday" and "L$D". At. Long. Last. A$AP debuted at number one on the Billboard 200, selling 116,000 copies in the United States. In conclusion to this, it also gave Rocky his second consecutive number one album on the charts to date. In Canada, the album debuted at number one, with 11,000 copies sold. The album has spent two more weeks beyond the top ten of the Billboard 200. As of July 2015, the album has sold 215,000 copies in the United States. It has sold 60,662 copies in the United Kingdom, as of June 2015. However, despite being his second consecutive number-one album, At. Long. Last. ASAP began to decline in album-equivalent sales, becoming Rocky's lowest-selling album in his career.On June 11, 2015, Rocky was featured on The Tonight Show, where he performed the song "L$D" with The Roots. In June, it was confirmed that he was featured on the single "Good for You" by Selena Gomez. In June 2015, he appeared on the "Carpool Karaoke" segment of The Late Late Show, riding with Rod Stewart and host James Corden.Rocky is featured on "Blended Family (What You Do for Love)", a track written with Alicia Keys for her sixth studio album Here in 2016. He is also featured on two tracks from the 2017 album Lust for Life by Lana Del Rey. The tracks are called "Summer Bummer", which also features Playboi Carti, and "Groupie Love". He also featured in "Pick It Up" by Famous Dex, released in October 2017.


=== 2018–present: Testing and upcoming fourth studio album ===
On January 23, 2018, ASAP Rocky released "☆☆☆☆☆ 5ive $tar$" on SoundCloud, produced by Metro Boomin, Frans Mernick, Jordan Blackmon and Daniel Lynas and featuring uncredited vocals by DRAM. Over the following two days he shared "Above", produced by Mernick and "Money Bags Freestyle (Dean Blunt Meditation)", produced by Blunt and featuring uncredited vocals by Lil Yachty. The songs were captioned "TESTING COMING SOON" and "THIS IS JUST A TEST", leading to speculation that they were in promotion of an upcoming studio album entitled Testing. On February 16, Rocky collaborated with Gucci Mane and 21 Savage for "Cocky", in promotion of the film Uncle Drew. He released the single "Bad Company" on March 27. It features rapper BlocBoy JB, as well as further allusions to Testing in its marketing. On April 5, he released a second single: "ASAP Forever". The song samples record producer Moby's 2000 single "Porcelain", crediting him as a featured artist. It was premiered on The Tonight Show alongside new track "Distorted Records", and a music video was released the following day. A day later he was featured on the song "One Track Mind", from rock band Thirty Seconds to Mars' fifth studio album America.
On May 25, 2018, Rocky released Testing to generally positive reviews from critics. It debuted at number four on the US Billboard 200, becoming ASAP Rocky's third consecutive top-five album on the chart, but another low-seller. In its second week, the album dropped to number 15, with 26,000 album-equivalent units (1,000 copies). The following week, Testing dropped to number 22 on the chart. On July 23, 2018, Rocky and Tyler, The Creator announced a collaborative project, WANGSAP, by releasing a music video of a remix of Monica's "Knock Knock" named "Potato Salad" on AWGE's "AWGE DVD (Vol. 3)". However, on January 23, 2019, Tyler, the Creator announced this album never existed.In May 2019, Juicy J announced Rocky began working on his upcoming album, formerly titled All Smiles. On August 28, ASAP Rocky released the music video for "Babushka Boi". It was directed by Nadia Lee Cohen.
In October 2021, ASAP Rocky released his 2011 mixtape Live. Love. ASAP to all streaming platforms in celebration of its 10-year anniversary.Rocky appeared on two tracks from Nigo's album, I Know Nigo!, released March 25, 2022, the opening track "Lost and Found Freestyle 2019" with Tyler, the Creator, and the single, "Arya". Rocky supported the Red Hot Chili Peppers on their 2022 international stadium tour. After he arrived late for a performance at Old Trafford, Manchester, he performed a shortened 20-minute set after the Chili Peppers.In May 2022, Rocky released the single, "D.M.B.", and followed up in December with "Shittin' Me". Also in December, he appeared on producer Metro Boomin's album Heroes & Villains, on the track "Feel the Fiyaaaah", which also featured late rapper Takeoff, who was gunned down a month prior to the album's release. He then confirmed a new album with production from Metro Boomin to materalize in the future. Later that month, he named his upcoming fourth album, Don't Be Dumb.


== Business ventures ==
In October 2011, Rocky signed a record deal with Sony Music Entertainment worth $3 million ($1.7 million of which was earmarked for his solo work; $1.3 million earmarked to fund his company). Rocky said that he sought a "bigger platform" for him and his collective with the deal. His first studio album planned to be under the deal, but it allowed him to continue releasing mixtapes through Sony/RED. Fellow rapper and A$AP Mob member A$AP Ferg also signed a joint venture deal with the RCA-distributed Polo Grounds Music; Ferg released his single "Work", for digital retail via various platforms. He later announced an official remix featuring Rocky, French Montana, ScHoolboy Q and Trinidad James.In 2013, he and ASAP Mob co-founder ASAP Bari released his A$AP merchandise brand, and went to collaborate with high-profile fashion designer and close friend Raf Simons. On October 2, 2014, A$AP Rocky announced he had officially signed a contract for worldwide representation with William Morris Endeavor.In February 2016, Guess released a collaboration with Rocky called GUE$$, which was inspired by Rocky's admiration for the brand's vintage '90s clothing that he wore while growing up.In 2022, Rocky launched his own brand of whisky called Mercer + Prince. It was officially launched on the Revolt TV show, Drink Champs, during a segment in a two-hour long interview.


== Personal life ==
From 2011 to 2012, Rocky dated Australian rapper Iggy Azalea. He began dating model Chanel Iman in early 2013, and in April 2014, they were reported to be engaged, but broke up in June 2014.On May 19, 2021, Rocky revealed during an interview with GQ that he is in a relationship with Barbadian singer Rihanna, describing her as "the love of my life". The two were first linked in 2013, after Rocky opened up for Rihanna's Diamonds World Tour. On January 31, 2022, People reported that the couple is expecting their first child. On May 19, 2022, it was confirmed that Rihanna had given birth to a boy. On May 10, 2023, Rocky revealed their child's name as RZA Athelaston Mayers, named after the Wu-Tang Clan founder and leader RZA. During the Super Bowl LVII halftime show, Rihanna revealed that she was pregnant with the couple's second child.Rocky was a pescetarian. In 2012, he transitioned to a vegetarian diet with the help of his vegan manager after learning of the horrors of the poultry industry. On his 2019 single "Babushka Boi", Rocky stated he is now a vegan.Rocky has said that while he was raised in a Christian household, he does not like going to an organized church, and instead has "[his] own relationship with God... I pray every day before I go to sleep." He addresses these views in the song "Holy Ghost" on his 2015 album At. Long. Last. ASAP. During Rocky's 2019 incarceration in Sweden, he prayed to keep himself occupied.


== Legal issues ==
In 2006, A$AP Rocky served two weeks in Rikers Island for drug dealing, where he shared a cell with future rapper Casanova.


=== Assault in Sweden ===
In July 2019, A$AP Rocky was arrested initially for aggravated, then for simple assault in Stockholm, Sweden, after an altercation in the street against a man named Mustafa Jafari and another person that involved A$AP Rocky and three of his entourage on June 30. Jafari was beaten, kicked, and cut with broken bottles when down on the ground. He suffered several cuts, requiring stitches, and a fractured rib. A$AP Rocky uploaded two videos of the incident to Instagram. In the first, he and his entourage repeatedly ask two young men, including Jafari, to stop following them as the latter complains about his headphones. In the other, created from footage of assorted events, Jafari's headphones break during a scuffle, and he is seen hitting A$AP Rocky's bodyguard with them. A woman is also seen in the video, accusing the two men of groping. Henrik Olsson Lilja, the defense attorney for A$AP Rocky, maintained that his client acted in self-defense after being attacked by Jafari.A$AP Rocky's bodyguard filed a counter-complaint against Jafari, and Jafari was initially suspected of harassment and minor assault or possibly attempted assault. The investigation against Jafari was dropped as prosecutors said he acted in self-defense, after being grabbed by the neck and pushed by the bodyguard. A$AP Rocky was arrested after being allowed to finish his gig at Stadion. As it was judged there was a risk that he may flee or tamper with evidence, he was kept in custody at Kronoberg Remand Prison until the trial, with two members of his entourage also under arrest. A$AP Rocky's ongoing tour was then put on hiatus due to the trial.He was visited by personnel from the US embassy shortly after his arrest. Several US artists called for a boycott of Sweden due to the incident. A petition to release him was started. The family asked Al Sharpton for help. US President Donald Trump tweeted his support for Rocky, and it was later revealed by justice minister Morgan Johansson that Trump had threatened trade restrictions against Sweden if Rocky was not released. Former US ambassador to Sweden Mark Brzezinski suggested that the government should intervene and speculated that racism may have been the cause of the brawl. Foreign minister Margot Wallström said the government is not allowed to interfere citing Chapter 11 §3 of the Swedish constitutional Instrument of Government which explicitly forbids the interference of politicians, or unrelated government offices, in the work of the courts of law.
A$AP Rocky was convicted of assault, given a suspended prison sentence and asked to pay 12,500 kr ($1,270) in damages to the victim. The court could not decide who used the bottle, but said it was not a case of self-defense. As A$AP Rocky had already served over a month in jail for the incident before the sentence was handed out, it was determined that he did not need to serve any additional time. The conviction does not bar him from returning to Sweden.


=== Alleged assault in Hollywood ===
On April 20, 2022, A$AP Rocky was arrested by LAPD officers upon arriving to the Los Angeles International Airport after a vacation with his partner, Rihanna. He was arrested for a potential assault with a deadly weapon in a Hollywood shooting on November 6, 2021. Bail was set at $550,000 and he was released shortly after.After his arrest, detectives executed a warrant to search his home, gaining entry by using a pry bar to force the gate open. Detectives took several boxes from his home to use as evidence. On August 15, 2022, the Los Angeles County District Attorney's office filed charges against Rocky.


== Discography ==

Long. Live. ASAP (2013)
At. Long. Last. ASAP (2015)
Testing (2018)
Don't Be Dumb (2023)


== Tours ==


=== Headlining ===
Injured Generation Tour (2019)


== Filmography ==


=== Film ===


=== Television ===


=== Video games ===


=== Music videos ===


== Accomplishments ==

His accomplishments include three BET Awards, two MTV awards, and nominations for two Grammy Awards and six World Music Awards, for a total of five wins and 37 nominations overall.


== References ==


== External links ==
 Quotations related to ASAP Rocky at Wikiquote
 Media related to ASAP Rocky at Wikimedia Commons
Album Website
ASAP Mob's website
ASAP Rocky at IMDbDavid Brown Williams (born 1983), better known by his stage name Roscoe, is an American rapper.
He released his debut album, Young Roscoe Philaphornia, in 2003, with the album debuting at #148 on the Billboard 200.


== Career ==
Roscoe was initially introduced to hip hop by his older brother Kurupt. At the time, Kurupt was signed to Death Row Records and was working on his debut album Dogg Food as one member of Tha Dogg Pound. Roscoe made his first appearance on his brother's album Tha Streetz Iz a Mutha, featuring on the vocals "I Call Shots" and "Girls All Pause" along with Nate Dogg. Daz Dillinger was impressed with Roscoe and helped to produce his debut mixtape, "When The Pain Inflict", released in 2001. Following it's positive reception, Roscoe signed to Priority Records and went on to release the album Young Roscoe Philaphornia in 2003. The album peaked at #22 on the Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums chart.
On October 17, 2013, Roscoe released his mixtape Tha Influence, featuring guest appearances from Xzibit and Kendrick Lamar. The mixtape features production by Best Kept Secret, Bink!, Charlie Red 3000, Fingazz, Hi-Tek, Jahlil Beats, Jake One, Just Blaze, Mike WiLL Made It, Nottz, Statik Selektah and Tone Mason.On November 11, 2014, Roscoe released his third studio album titled Scoe, Tha Influence Album. This was the first project to be released under his new label, 3D Shadez Entertainment. The album features Too Short, Kurupt, Kobe, Clyde Carson, Xzibit, KJ Konteh, Yummy Bingham, E-Note, and K Young. On the album, Roscoe took a more musical approach by using live musicians rather than producers.


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===
2003: Young Roscoe Philaphornia (#148 200, #22 R&B/Hip-Hop)
2006: I Luv Cali
2008: Stray Dogg - Off Tha Leash, Off Tha Chain
2014: Tha Influence Album


=== Collaboration albums ===
2008: Armz Up (with Bulletz & AK)
2009: Kurupt & Roscoe - Tha Tekneek Filez (with Kurupt)
2009: The Frank & Jess Story (with Kurupt) (#82 R&B/Hip-Hop)


=== Mixtapes ===
2001: When the Pain Inflict
2009: Philaphornia Pt. 2 Tha Philly Fanatic
2013: Tha Influence
2013: Tha influence (East Coast Edition), hosted by DJ Whoo-Kid
2013: Tha Influence 2: X-mas Treez


=== Singles ===
2000: "I Love Cali" (#90 R&B/Hip-Hop)
2002: "Get Ready" featuring Kokane
2002: "Head 2 Toe" featuring Sleepy Brown
2003: "Smooth Sailin'" (#73 R&B/Hip-Hop)
2006: "Summertime Again" featuring Fingazz
2006: "Fuck Buddy" featuring Fingazz
2014: "Break Yo Bed" featuring Clyde Carson, Too $hort, All Star
2014: "I Do All Dat" featuring Kurupt


=== Guest appearances ===


== References ==Asher Paul Roth (born August 11, 1985) is an American rapper. He is best known for his debut single "I Love College". Roth released his debut studio album Asleep in the Bread Aisle, on April 20, 2009, by Universal Motown, SRC, and School Boy Records; the latter of which was launched by Roth's former manager Scooter Braun. Roth later left Schoolboy Records in late 2012, due to creative differences with Braun. In 2013, Roth signed with indie record label Federal Prism, on which he released his second studio album, RetroHash.


== Life and career ==


=== 1985–2007: Early life and career beginnings ===
Roth was born and raised in Morrisville, Pennsylvania. He is of Jewish and Scottish ancestry. His mother, Elizabeth (née McConnell), is a yoga instructor, and his father, David Roth, is the executive director of a design firm. He attended Pennsbury High School. After graduating from high school, he entered West Chester University and became an Elementary Education major, while continuing to record verses over the popular production of other rappers.
During his sophomore year, he posted some of his verses on his Myspace page and sent a friend request to Scooter Braun, an Atlanta-based promoter and former VP of Marketing for Jermaine Dupri's So So Def Recordings. One week after speaking to Braun, Roth flew down to Atlanta and was immediately signed by Braun, who subsequently became his manager.


=== 2008–2010: Asleep in the Bread Aisle ===

After linking up with Braun, Roth moved to Atlanta to pursue a hip-hop career full-time. As industry buzz grew, Roth was courted by a number of labels, including SRC, Def Jam, Warner Bros. Records and Atlantic Records.  Roth would eventually sign a joint venture between Braun's Schoolboy and Steve Rifkind, chairman of SRC/Universal Records. On June 13, 2008, via the internet, Roth released his first professional release, the Don Cannon and DJ Drama-helmed mixtape, The Greenhouse Effect Vol. 1. This resulted in Roth being the second white rapper to be featured on Drama and Cannon's Gangsta Grillz series. Roth subsequently began recording his major-label debut album. In late 2008, it was revealed Roth was included in XXL's 2009 annual Freshman Class, and was featured on the cover alongside fellow up-and-coming rappers Kid Cudi, Wale, B.o.B, Charles Hamilton, Cory Gunz, Blu, Mickey Factz, Ace Hood and Curren$y.Roth's debut single "I Love College", was released in January 2009 and received many hits across North America. The song also served as his debut album lead single. His second single "Lark on my Go-Kart", was released March 24, 2009. After the two singles were released, Roth's debut studio album Asleep in the Bread Aisle was released on April 20, 2009, in honor of cannabis subculture's 420 holiday. During the summer of 2009, Roth joined fellow XXL freshmen alumni Kid Cudi and B.o.B, for 'The Great Hangover' concert tour. Roth also joined Blink-182 in the second half of their reunion tour in the fall of 2009.


=== 2010–2012: The Rawth EP and other projects ===
After touring in 2009 and releasing a second mixtape titled Seared Foie Gras with Quince and Cranberry in March 2010, Roth began working on his second studio album, then-titled The Spaghetti Tree. From his friend Boyder's YouTube page, he was seen working with high-profile record producers Pharrell Williams and Nottz Raw. While working with Nottz, the two of them decided to collaborate on a project together, due to having a number of records rejected by the label due to sampling and copyright issues. The result was an eight track extended play (EP), solely produced by Nottz, entitled The Rawth EP. The EP, which features appearances from Colin Munroe, D.A. (of Chester French), Rhymefest and Kardinal Offishall, was released December 27, 2010.On July 26, 2010, Roth released "G.R.I.N.D (Get Ready It's a New Day)", the initial first single from The Spaghetti Tree, and promoted the song by traveling to different radio stations across the country. In a July 2010 XXL interview, while speaking on The Spaghetti Tree, Roth revealed four tracks from the album. One was said to feature West Coast rapper Game, one produced by Swizz Beatz and another was revealed to be titled "Run it Back". On May 25, 2011, it was announced that Roth's second studio album would no longer be called The Spaghetti Tree. On July 19, 2011, Roth released a song titled "Last Man Standing", as a single. The song, which features African-American singer-songwriter Akon, was featured on the soundtrack to the 2011 video game Madden NFL 12.
In an interview with Rikki Martinez of Power 106, Roth announced he would be releasing a mixtape titled Pabst & Jazz and revealed the new title of his upcoming second album to be Is This Too Orange?. On November 11, 2011, he released the first offering off Pabst & Jazz, a song titled "Common Knowledge". In November 2011, Roth signed with Def Jam Recordings through the resurface of defunct label Loud Records, which is now still a subsidiary label of SRC Records. In April 2012, Roth revealed he was once again working with producer Nottz Raw, as well as Blink 182 drummer Travis Barker, on an EP titled Rawther.  In late 2012, Roth revealed he scrapped the Is This Too Orange? title for his second album, out of respect for Def Jam label mate Frank Ocean's debut Channel Orange (2012).


=== 2013–2016: RetroHash ===

On June 5, 2013, Roth announced he would be reuniting with DJ Drama and Don Cannon, to release the sequel to his critically acclaimed mixtape The Greenhouse Effect The Greenhouse Effect Vol. 2 was released on June 25, 2013. In December 2013, Roth revealed his long-awaited and often-delayed second studio album is titled RetroHash which was released on April 22, 2014. In a December interview, on a Juan Epstein podcast with Peter Rosenberg and Cipha Sounds, Roth announced he is still planning on releasing his collaborative EP Rawther, with Nottz Raw and Travis Barker; as well as an EP with renowned hip hop producer Pete Rock, tentatively titled Pete Roth. Upon its release, RetroHash debuted at number 45 on the US Billboard 200 chart, with first-week sales of 6,100 copies in the United States. In March 2016, Roth announced that he is preparing his third studio album Red Hot Revival.


=== 2016–present: Flowers on the Weekend ===

In 2016 Asher Roth finally moved back to his home state of Pennsylvania after many years living away in Atlanta, New York and Los Angeles. He reconnected with an old musical friend called Rob Deckhart, and they stated working on a number of songs. Finally, over the years, they came up with the album Flowers On the Weekend that was released in April 2020.


== Musical style ==


=== Influences ===
Asher Roth cites Jay-Z and Eminem among his influences in hip hop, mostly by Jay-Z's "Hard Knock Life". Growing up, Roth was exposed to little hip hop in his family, with his parents preferring "The Temptations, Earth, Wind & Fire ... Bruce Springsteen and Dire Straits." According to Roth:

The first CD I ever bought was Dave Matthews Band's Crash... that is how suburban I am... I finally got into hip hop in '98 when I heard the Annie sample with Jay-Z.... when I wrote my "A Milli" freestyle, that was me listening to 10 years of hip hop and not relating to it at all. Like, damn, I don't sell coke. Damn, I don't have cars or 25-inch rims. I don't have guns. I finally got to a point where I had the confidence to do this thing myself, and I was making music for me. And it turns out, a lot of people feel the same way I do.
He also stated:

Hip-hop has always been very influential in the 'burbs, [but] it's just a matter of where we could relate to it. You find a lot of kids that are really confused. You look at them and they're dressed out of character. They don't look right. I figured out, I don't have to dress this way, but I can still love hip-hop.


== Personal life ==
Roth does not consider himself Jewish, although his name sometimes leads people to believe that he is, and he has Jewish ancestry.Roth is open about his use of cannabis. As stated in an interview conducted and filmed by DJ Vlad, Roth explained his views about the legalization of cannabis: "Cigarettes don't do anything for you except kill you... I honestly don't believe [marijuana] is the gateway drug, because I use it, and I've never done anything else... I'm trying to be open about my pot smoking."


== Discography ==

Asleep in the Bread Aisle (2009)
RetroHash (2014)
Flowers on the Weekend (2020)


== Filmography ==


== Awards ==
MTV Video Music Awards
Best New Artist ("I Love College") [Nominated]
Best Hip Hop Video ("I Love College") [Nominated]


== References ==


== External links ==
Official websiteDanielle Prendergast (born September 8, 1990), better known by her stage name Elle Royal (formerly known as Patwa), is an independent Hip-Hop artist hailing from The Bronx, New York. Her breakthrough came in 2010 when her video "What Can I Say" went viral after WorldStarHipHop featured her as the “Female Artist of the Week”. Elle Royal later released the mixtape One Gyal Army under Patwa in 2010, followed by the singles “Jammin”, “Lights”, and “Statements” in 2015 under her current stage name, Elle Royal.


== Biography ==
Elle Royal (formerly Patwa) was born in New York and raised in the Wakefield area of the Bronx, and later, Lawrenceville, Georgia. Both of her parents are from Kingston, Jamaica. Growing up, Elle lived in a multi-family home shared with many cousins, one of which had a studio in his home. It was here that Elle constructed her first rhyme at 14. From there, Elle began writing and recording music in a studio she built in her room. During High School, Elle self-recorded her first mixtape “One Gyal Army” and later released its first single “What Can I Say” in 2010.


=== Name change ===
Elle describes her career as Patwa as a time when she was making music for the intent of acquiring commercial success. As she grew older her desire to shed light on topics of importance grew also. It was her belief that females were losing their power and self-worth in a male-dominated society. In an effort to promote higher consciousness and self-esteem among women, Patwa changed her name to Elle Royal and her focus to inspire and empower females. In 2015 she signed and collaborated with female singers, rappers, models and dancers under a new label she founded. She then changed her name to Elle Royal to reflect her new purpose of empowering women. As she explains, “Elle” comes from her first name, Danielle and “Royal” comes from “having the status of a King or Queen”.


== Education ==
Elle attended Georgia State University in Atlanta Georgia and graduated cum laude with a bachelor's degree in journalism and political science. She has stated that she has worked as a paralegal throughout her time pursuing music and would be a lawyer if she did not pursue music.


== Social activism ==
Elle Royal is very passionate about her support of young women. She has marched at several events for women's causes and supports many female platforms. In addition, Elle founded her own female empowered label whose purpose is to ensure young women's voices are heard and reflected throughout the mainstream. Elle's label pushes for women to take control of their self-image, self-respect and to be more confident and aware of their power in society.


== Musical style and influences ==
Elle has always gravitated towards 90s hip-hop citing hip-hop's "Golden Era" as her favorite time in music. She also grew up influenced by 90s R&B and Reggae. Using her raspy delivery, Elle fuses all three styles into a blend she identifies as Reggae Soul. Her rapping style has been compared to that of Queen Latifah, MC Lyte, Foxy Brown, Lady Saw, Jay Z, AZ, Max B and Shyne. She is influenced by culture, everyday struggle, and other strong women.


== Discography ==


=== EPs ===
2015 – Statements


=== Mixtapes ===
2011 – One Gyal Army


=== Singles & Videos ===
2011 – What Can I say
2011 – Ain't No Sunshine
2011 – How I Feel
2012 – Bad Gyal Ft. Eric Sermon
2012 – Dem Nuh Ready ft Mad Lion
2013 – Floating
2014 – Young Girl
2015 – Who You Wit
2015 – Champagne
2015 – Statements
2016—Jammin
2016—Lights


== References ==


== External links ==
Official websiteDavid Mauricio Bowen-Petterson (born May 20, 1983), better known by his stage name David Rush, is an American rapper from Highland Park, New Jersey. He is perhaps best known for his commercial debut (and only) single as a lead artist, "Shooting Star" in 2008, which had a popular remix featuring American EDM duo LMFAO. He was also featured on the song "Go Girl" by Pitbull and Trina, which was featured on The Boatlift (2007). Rush eventually became a record producer, having produced for Jason Derulo's single "Stupid Love" from the album Talk Dirty (2014).


== Career ==
In 2007, under the moniker Young Bo$$, Rush scored his first big feature on the song "Go Girl", by fellow American rapper Pitbull, which peaked at No. 83 on the US Billboard Hot 100. Following this, he officially changed his stage name to David Rush and on September 18, 2008, released his debut mixtape, Feel the Rush Vol. 1. The mixtape features his biggest success to date, his commercial debut single, "Shooting Star", which features Pitbull and was produced by AYB. The single charted on the Canadian Hot 100 and also reached the top ten on the US Billboard Rhythmic Top 40 chart. "Shooting Star" was remixed featuring production from LMFAO and vocals from Kevin Rudolf. Rush collaborated with Pitbull again in the making of Pitbull's 2012 album Global Warming, where Rush was featured on a song titled "Everybody Fucks", alongside African-American R&B singer Akon.


== Discography ==


=== Mixtapes ===
2008: Feel the Rush Vol. 1
2016: The Alive Project
2016: GAWD [[Get A Win Daily]]
2017: One Day From The Sun


=== Singles ===


==== Featured singles ====


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
David Rush at AllMusic
David Rush discography at DiscogsRobert Fitzgerald Diggs (born July 5, 1969), better known by his stage name RZA ( RIZ-ə), is an American rapper, actor, filmmaker, and record producer. He is the de facto leader of the hip hop group Wu-Tang Clan, having produced most albums for the group and its respective members. He is a cousin of two other original Wu-Tang Clan members: GZA and Ol' Dirty Bastard. He has also released solo albums under the alter-ego Bobby Digital, along with executive producing credits for side projects. After forming the Wu-Tang Clan, RZA was a founding member of the horrorcore group Gravediggaz, where he went by the name The RZArector.
RZA has been heavily involved in filmmaking since the late 90s. He has scored a number of films, most notably Kill Bill: Volume 1 (2003) and Kill Bill: Volume 2 (2004). He has written and directed in film and television, starting with his directorial debut, The Man with the Iron Fists, in 2012. He has also acted in numerous films and TV series, including the films American Gangster and Brick Mansions, and the TV series Gang Related and Californication.
He is especially known for his music production, with a style that includes the use of soul samples and sparse beats that has proved highly influential. The magazine The Source placed him on its list of the 20 greatest producers in the magazine's twenty-year history. Vibe listed him among the top 8 greatest hip-hop producers of all time, and NME placed him on their list of the 50 Greatest Producers Ever.


== Early life ==
Diggs was born on July 5, 1969, in Brownsville, Brooklyn. He was named after the Kennedy brothers Robert and John Fitzgerald, both of whom his mother greatly admired. Diggs has called his given name an "honorable" name, given the legacy of both Robert and John. Diggs has a younger brother, Terrance Hamlin, better known as the rapper 9th Prince, and an older brother named Mitchell “Divine” Diggs.
From ages three to seven, Diggs spent summers in North Carolina with his uncle, who encouraged him to read and study. Diggs was introduced to hip hop music at the age of nine, and by eleven, was competing in rap battles. He relocated to Steubenville, Ohio, in 1990, to live with his mother. He spent weekends in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, where his father ran a convenience store in the city's Hill District.Diggs got involved with petty crime and drug-dealing, and was charged with attempted murder while in Steubenville. He was acquitted of the charge, giving him what he has called a "second chance".


== Music career ==


=== Before the Wu-Tang Clan ===
Diggs first became interested in making his own hip-hop music in 1979 when a friend of his introduced him to Rapper's Delight by The Sugarhill Gang and in 1984, Diggs formed a rap group with his cousins Russell Jones, then known as The Specialist, and Gary Grice, then known as Allah Justice, called "Force of the Imperial Master", which they soon after renamed as "All in Together Now" in 1985. Around this time Diggs formed the DMD Posse which consisted of RZA, Raekwon, Ghostface Killah, U-God, Inspectah Deck, 4th Disciple and Method Man. Diggs and Grice then signed with Jamaica Records for management purposes and Jamaica convinced Tommy Boy Records to sign Diggs as a solo artist in 1989 under the name Prince Rakeem.  He released the original Ooh I Love You Rakeem promotion version of the EP, but was forced to remix and rerelease the single when Tommy Boy failed to acquire the rights to the original sample. The rereleased version underperformed commercially, and Diggs was subsequently dropped by Tommy Boy.


=== 1992–1993: Forming the Wu-Tang Clan ===
After a shoot-out in Ohio in 1992, he faced eight years in jail. "When they said 'not guilty', my face stuck in a smile for three days," he recalled. "I was just walking around town, thinking about my daughter and my wife. Right then I said goodbye to anything that would put me in that situation again. I was up on trial on an attempted murder charge. I was a motherfucking fool, with all that knowledge in my head and ending up there."
In 1992, Diggs formed a new group with his two cousins and five other childhood friends. They named the group Wu-Tang Clan, after the 1983 kung fu film Shaolin and Wu Tang. As part of the group's formation, each member chose a new nickname for themselves. Diggs chose "RZA", based on a nickname he had been given by fans of his music, "Rza Rza Rakeem", which in turn was based on a song by All in Together Now, "Pza Pza Pumpin", as well as Diggs' graffiti tag, "Razor". He created a backronym for "RZA", stating that the name stood for "Ruler, Zig-Zag-Zig, Allah" which further translated into "Ruler, Knowledge-Wisdom-Understanding, Allah" when using the Supreme Alphabet.Wu-Tang Clan released its first single, "Protect Ya Neck", in December 1992. Masta Killa then joined the group in 1993, becoming its ninth member. They released their debut album, Enter the Wu-Tang (36 Chambers) in November 1993. RZA operated as Wu-Tang Clan's de facto leader, producing the group's songs and deciding who would get placed on which tracks.


=== 1994–1996: Gravediggaz and Wu-Tang solo projects: Round one ===
As each of the group's members embarked on solo careers, RZA continued to produce nearly everything Wu-Tang released during the period 1994–1996, which included both composing and arranging the instrumental tracks as well as overseeing and directing the creative process. RZA's rule over the Clan at this time is described in 2004's Wu-Tang Manual book as "a dictatorship". He also released a hit single of his own, in the form of "Wu-Wear: The Garment Renaissance". The song was featured on the High School High soundtrack, and was released to promote the Wu-Tang clothing brand, also called "Wu-Wear". It peaked at #60 on the Billboard Hot 100, and #6 on the Hot Rap Singles chart.
 When it came time for the Gravediggaz, Prince Paul was thinking about putting a group together. He wanted to get some good MCs. Poetic was another dope MC who was underrated out on Long Island. He had one single out on Tommy Boy that didn't take off, but he was a dope MC. As the Grym Reaper, you know how many dope lyrics he dropped. Frukwan, one of the top lyricists out of Stetsasonic. He and Paul were friends already. He told him about me. He said, "I know this one guy who is super-dope."
At the same time, I was also trying to do Wu-Tang. I was trying to start my own company and stuff, so when Paul called me up and invited me to his crib on Long Island and told me his idea for forming this group, I thought it would be an honor to be in a group with him. But I told him, "I'm also producing a group, and I'm also part of a family that I'm building." He said, "Yo, that's crazy." We would talk a lot of times. [Ol' Dirty Bastard] came to his house a lot of times with me. [Method Man], too. We all would just go there and try to find ways to get out of the streets. Me, I was trying to get out of the ghetto. Paul had a lot of respect for me, so he helped me break out of it. I think he liked that I was so dark, but I didn't know I was dark.


=== 1997: Wu-Tang Forever ===
1997 saw the release of Wu-Tang Forever, the Wu-Tang Clan's highly anticipated second album. The album for the first time featured RZA delegating a small number of beat-making duties to other producers in the Wu-Tang camp, such as his protégés Mathematics, True Master and 4th Disciple who are known as the original Wu-Elements, and Clan member Inspectah Deck.


=== 1998–1999: Gravediggaz and Wu-Tang solo projects: Round two ===
During the 1998–2000 period RZA ceased to produce every Wu-Tang solo album as he had done previously, but continued to contribute usually one or two songs on average to each record as well as receiving an Executive Producer credit.

"I had to put out Bobby Digital instead of The Cure because if I didn't do that I would've suffered two things. First, I would have revealed where I was musically too soon. Wu-Tang is the perfect medium to expose anything new because I got the most people coming together to buy it. For me to expose it for my own self, I don't think that would've been a wise thing for me to do. I might've caught more people than Bobby Digital caught, but I still wouldn't catch the magnitude of what the Wu-Tang could catch. Maybe this year or next year the game may be different. The Cure is so intimate in writing that you gotta live that Cure shit. I was living like Bobby Digital in '98, '99 na'mean? So if I put "The Cure" out, then I wouldn't even be able to get on stage and perform it for ya'll cause I'd be lying."


=== 2001–2004: Post The W solo projects ===
In 1999 the RZA moved into composing film scores. His first work, Jim Jarmusch's Ghost Dog: The Way of the Samurai (1999), earned praise; he also had a brief cameo in the film itself, as a fellow samurai wearing camouflage. The experience was positive and, as he noted during an interview on National Public Radio's Fresh Air, the work with traditional musicians gave him the desire to learn how to read and write music. In 2004, he co-scored David S. Goyer's "Blade: Trinity" with composer Ramin Djawadi.

This is one of my biggest adventures, and one of my [best] feelings. We watched Kill Bill in Manhattan. At the premiere, that happened, but you know, that's Hollywood. But in Manhattan, a theater, just a bunch of kids coming from wherever New York, inside a movie theater and the movie's coming on. They don't even know that I'm the man with the music, and when it said, "Original Music by The RZA", we hear the audience clapping. And they didn't clap for nothing else, because the movie's just coming on. I was like, 'Wow, what the fuck is that about?' That's different. It actually might be something special. You never care who did that... Once you see who stars in the shit, you don't read "edited", you don't read all that. You be eating your popcorn and it go right by you. But, for somebody to see that and then clap, that's a different thing right there. That felt pretty pleasing.


=== 2005–present: Solo projects: Round three ===
He has also stated that the long-delayed The Cure album will be his final solo album, so that he can devote more time to his movie directing career.Before signing with SRC Records in 2007, RZA was flooded with offers from Bad Boy Records, Aftermath Records, Interscope and Def Jam among others for the Wu-Tang Clan super-group.In 2007, he produced the score of the Japanese anime Afro Samurai starring Samuel L. Jackson. In 2007 he released the little-publicized instrumental album The RZA-Instrumental Experience, and worked with Raekwon on his highly anticipated Only Built 4 Cuban Linx II. From 2005 to 2008 he collaborated with System of a Down bassist Shavo Odadjian on the project Achozen The group released two singles, one of which, "Deuces", was included in the 2009 film Babylon A.D. The group also recorded an album that has remained unreleased, although eight of the songs were released in 2015.

"The time is right to bring some older material to the masses digitally. Our fans have been dedicated and patient, and they're hungry to hear the music that has set us apart from so many others. Hip-hop is alive in Wu Music, and with The Orchard, we've got a solid partner that understands our audience and is committed to doing all they can to help us reach the fans. I'm definitely looking forward to working with them to see what else we all come up with. There's much more to come."
In 2010 he worked on what was intended as a solo album for GZA, Liquid Swords II, but the album remains unreleased. RZA also worked with Kanye West on the latter's fifth album, My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy, as well as Watch the Throne by Kanye and Jay-Z.
In a 2011 interview, RZA revealed that he had recently decided to clean out his beat machines of instrumentals he made for the Wu-Tang Clan that were never used; as a result, he gave away ten beats each to Nas, Busta Rhymes and Talib Kweli, as well as 20 beats for Kanye West, including two that were used on West's previous two albums. RZA produced UK artist Josh Osho's 2012 debut album L.I.F.E.
RZA also contributed vocals to three songs on John Frusciante's 2012 EP Letur-Lefr and in 2013 he contributed vocals to one song on Kid Cudi's 2013 album Indicud. In August 2012 RZA founded a new record label, Soul Temple Records, with a distribution deal from RED Distribution. On September 28, 2012, he hosted one episode of the web series Equals Three, substituting for regular host Ray William Johnson. He appeared on Earl Sweatshirt's album Doris, contributing a verse on the track "Molasses". Despite artistic disagreements with Raekwon, RZA and The Wu-Tang Clan released their sixth album A Better Tomorrow in 2014.
In 2013, RZA and Paul Banks began to collaborate as Banks & Steelz for what became the 2016 album Anything But Words. Guest appearances include Kool Keith, Ghostface Killah, Method Man, and Masta Killa. Two singles were released from the album, "Love + War" and "Giant". RZA collaborated with Ramin Djawadi, with whom he co-scored Blade Trinity and Blake Perlman for the song "Drift" for the Guillermo del Toro film "Pacific Rim".
In June 2020, ice cream company Good Humor approached RZA to create a new jingle for ice cream trucks to play, to replace the tune "Turkey in the Straw", long associated with minstrel shows that often featured racist lyrics. (Good Humor does not directly operate any trucks, but the company wanted to encourage ice cream truck drivers to not play the song.) RZA's resulting composition was released in August 2020.In a recent 2020 interview, RZA discussed how being stuck at home during the COVID global crisis resulted in him resuming work on his long-unreleased The Cure album.


== Wu-Recording labels ==
Since the early 1990s, various Wu Tang Clan-affiliated recording labels were established. The earlier labels are believed to be dissolved. The connection that RZA had to these labels is unknown.
Other record labels were later founded in the early 2000s, and are still active in the present. Very little is known about these labels, other than the fact that RZA produces music on them. It is unknown if RZA is CEO, or has high position within these labels, considering that he was never known to have a CEO position of any recording label.

Wu-Tang Records
Razor Sharp Records
36 Chambers Records and Wu Music Group
Protect Ya Neck Records
Wu-Tang International
Soul Temple Records


== Artistry ==
RZA's production technique, specifically the manner of chopping up and/or speeding or slowing soul samples to fit his beats, has been imitated by hip hop producers including Kanye West and Just Blaze. West's own take on RZA's style briefly flooded the rap market with what was dubbed "chipmunk soul," the speeding of a vocal sample to where it sounded as though the singer had inhaled helium. Several producers at the time copied the style, creating other offshoots. West has admitted that his style was distinctly influenced by the RZA's production, saying
"Wu-Tang? Me and my friends talk about this all the time... We think Wu-Tang had one of the biggest impacts as far as a movement. From slang to style of dress, skits, the samples. Similar to the [production] style I use, RZA has been doing that."
In response, RZA himself has spoken quite positively of the comparisons:

"All good. I got super respect for Kanye. He came up to me about a year or two ago. He gave me mad praising and blessings... For people to say Wu-Tang inspire Kanye, Kanye is one of the biggest artists in the world. That goes back to what we say: 'Wu-Tang is forever.' Kanye is going to inspire people to be like him."
After hearing Kanye's work on The Blueprint, RZA claimed that a torch-passing had occurred between him and West, saying, "The shoes gotta be filled. If you ain't gonna do it, somebody else is gonna do it. That's how I feel about rap today."His Bobby Digital albums introduced tweaked-out new age elements to his sound; these have incorporated themselves more fully into his beats on newer albums such as Method Man's 4:21... The Day After.

"The way I produce now is I produce more like a musician", RZA said. "In the old days, I produced more like a DJ. I didn't understand music theory at all. Now that I do understand music theory, I make my music more playable, meaning not only could you listen to it, you could get someone else to play it. Before, you couldn't even write down Wu-Tang music. I think almost 80 percent of this record can be duplicated by a band, which is important for music, because that means 10 years from now, somebody can make a whole song out of it and cover it like how I'm covering The Beatles song."
In a 2010 radio interview with UK hip hop station Conspiracy Worldwide Radio, RZA spoke in great detail about the homemade, candid ethos of much of his work, including the organic creation process behind ODB's debut album.


=== Alter egos ===
RZA is known for having multiple aliases, for different lyrical styles and personalities: Prince Rakeem, The Abbot, Bobby Digital, Bobby Steels, the Scientist, Prince Delight, Prince Dynamite, Ruler Zig-Zag-Zig Allah. During his time with the Gravediggaz, he went by the name the RZArector, which is for waking up the mentally dead.


== Film career ==


=== Acting ===
RZA has had cameo appearances in films including Funny People, Due Date, Gospel Hill, Ghost Dog, Life Is Hot in Cracktown and Popstar: Never Stop Never Stopping.
RZA appeared in Derailed, Coffee and Cigarettes, and American Gangster. He appeared in G.I. Joe: Retaliation, as the character Blind Master. In 2010, RZA appeared in the science fiction action film Repo Men. In 2014, RZA took on the role of Tremaine Alexander in the film Brick Mansions opposite Paul Walker and David Belle, a remake of District 13. He played "Mr. L.C.", the main antagonist, in the Thai martial arts film Tom Yum Goong 2.
RZA directed and starred in The Man with the Iron Fists (2012).
In 2013, RZA provided guest voices in the sixth season episode of Robot Chicken. "Botched Jewel Heist", in three sketches. His first role is an anthropomorphic strawberry who is shot dead in a mob hit, causing his jelly blood to splatter onto a large slice of bread below (which was covered in the peanut-butter blood of Mr. Peanut, who was killed the same way moments before). In his second role, he plays himself, and raps about being a pescetarian, although RZA had shifted from a pescetarian diet to a vegan diet in 1997. His third role was as the Halloween Road Warrior in a sketch where in a post-apocalyptic world, a family is pursued by road warriors representing forgotten holidays, who aim to kidnap their two children.
RZA played the role of Samurai Apocalypse in the television series Californication in 9 episodes.RZA played the supporting role of Shotgun Steve in the romantic action comedy movie Mr. Right with Sam Rockwell and Anna Kendrick.RZA portrayed Dean in 2019 film The Dead Don't Die.RZA narrates a character, known as Wesley, on the 2019 Netflix original series Day Break in Season 1, episode 5 named "Homecoming Redux or My So Called Stunt Double Life". 
RZA portrayed Harry Mansell, brother of the protagonist, in the 2021 action comedy film Nobody with Bob Odenkirk and Connie Nielsen.


=== Filmmaking ===
I made my albums like movies, you know what I mean? I wanted people to be able to listen to a movie in their car while they was driving. "I want to start off making movies where people will know they're at a movie. Like my man Tarantino, he did that movie Pulp Fiction – classic movie, man. Every time it comes on TV or cable, I have to stop and watch it. And it's based on nothing, really. There's only a few people out there that are able to do that, where it comes from nothing but the vision and imagination of the artist.
In the late 1990s, RZA began production of a feature-length film based on "Bobby Digital", an alias he used on various albums. Though the film was never completed, he continued shooting music videos for his side projects and solo tracks.
RZA directed his first feature film, The Man with the Iron Fists, in 2011, from a script he wrote the previous year. Directors Quentin Tarantino and Eli Roth were involved in production, writing, and casting according to several movie websites. The film was released in fall 2012.


== Personal life ==
RZA is a Five Percenter and is usually seen wearing the 5% Nation's flag necklace around his neck. He actively extols the 5% culture (which include the Supreme Mathematics and the Supreme Alphabet). He has also embraced various aspects of Buddhism, Taoism, Confucianism, Islam, and Christianity, as he describes in his two books, The Wu-Tang Manual and The Tao of Wu. He has described the Quran, The Bible, and the Lotus Sutra as three of his favorite books, stating that each contains enlightenment.  RZA provided the afterword to See You at San Diego: An Oral History of Comic-Con, Fandom, and the Triumph of Geek Culture.His hobbies include watching martial arts films, and he is considered an "encyclopedia of martial arts films" due to his knowledge of the genre. RZA met and befriended Shaolin Monk Shi Yan Ming after being introduced by Ol' Dirty Bastard's manager Sophia Chang. His favorite movies include Five Deadly Venoms, The 36th Chamber of Shaolin, Ninja Scroll  and Fist of the North Star. His second well-known hobby is chess. He is a Director of Development and champion of the Hip-Hop Chess Federation.RZA is vegan and has promoted the vegan lifestyle and compassion for animals on behalf of PETA. Until 1997, he was a pescetarian; "I tell you one thing I did use to like: the fish and chips," he stated. "But I stopped eating fish this year. One day I just felt the death in it."RZA is a resident of Millstone Township, New Jersey.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===
Bobby Digital in Stereo (1998)
Digital Bullet (2001)
Birth of a Prince (2003)
Digi Snacks (2008)


=== Collaboration albums ===
6 Feet Deep with Gravediggaz (1994)
The Pick, the Sickle and the Shovel with Gravediggaz (1997)
The World According to RZA (2003)
Anything But Words with Banks & Steelz (2016)
Saturday Afternoon Kung Fu Theater with DJ Scratch (2022)


== Filmography ==


=== Films ===


=== Television ===


=== Video games ===


== Awards and nominations ==


== Bibliography ==
The Wu-Tang Manual (2005)
The Tao of Wu (2009)


== References ==


== External links ==

RZA at AllMusic
RZA discography at Discogs 
RZA at IMDbDerek Murphy (born December 29, 1968), better known as Sadat X, is an American rapper, best known as a member of alternative hip hop group Brand Nubian. Originally known as Derek X, Sadat takes his name from former Egyptian president Anwar Sadat.
In 1996, Sadat recorded on the Red Hot Organization's compilation CD America Is Dying Slowly, alongside Biz Markie, Wu-Tang Clan, Fat Joe and others. The CD, meant to raise awareness of the AIDS epidemic among African American men, was called "a masterpiece" by The Source.


== Biography ==
Sadat X is involved in teaching children. He has worked as an elementary school teacher in New Rochelle, New York, qualified as a firefighter, and coaches children's basketball for the New York City Basketball League.On March 23, 2010, Sadat X released Wild Cowboys II, the sequel to his 1996 solo debut Wild Cowboys, on Fat Beats Records. The album featured guest appearances from Ill Bill, Kurupt, A.G., Brand Nubian, Rhymefest and others, with production from Pete Rock, Diamond D, Buckwild, Sir Jinx, Will Tell and Dub Sonata. On February 23, 2010, he released an EP, containing five songs from the album and complementary instrumentals. The first single from the album was "Turn It Up" which features and is produced by, Pete Rock.
In 2015, Sadat appeared in Mya Baker's documentary film Afraid of Dark which examined the experiences of Black men in America.In 2009, Sadat X and music producer Will Tell developed a wine-tasting web series entitled True Wine Connoisseurs. The wine show with a hip hop twist is now in its 5th season.On December 22, 2005, Sadat was arrested in Harlem and charged with criminal possession of a weapon, reckless endangerment and resisting arrest. On October 3, 2006, Female Fun Music released Sadat's third album, Black October.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===
Wild Cowboys (1996)
Experience & Education (2005)
Black October (2006)
Generation X (2008)
Brand New Bein' (2009)
Wild Cowboys II (2010)
No Features (2011)
Love, Hell or Right (2012)
Never Left (2015)
Agua (2016)
The Sum of a Man (2017)
Science Of Life (2022)


=== Collaboration albums ===
XL (with El Da Sensei) (2018)
The Foundation (2019)


=== Extended plays ===
The State of New York vs. Derek Murphy (2000)


=== With Brand Nubian ===
One for All (1990)
In God We Trust (1993)
Everything Is Everything (1994)
Foundation (1998)
Fire in the Hole (2004)
Time's Runnin' Out (2007)


=== With Trinity ===
20 In (2013)


=== Guest appearances ===
(1991) "Show Business" from The Low End Theory by A Tribe Called Quest
(1996) "Heart Full of Sorrow" from Truth Crushed to Earth Shall Rise Again by House of Pain
(1999) "Come On" from the posthumous album Born Again by rapper The Notorious B.I.G.
(2008) "Stay In Ya Lane" from Operation Take Back Hip Hop by Craig G & Marley Marl
(2008) "Keep It Classy" from Ja tu tylko sprzątam by O.S.T.R.
(2018) "Hood Operatic" from Brooklyn rapper Rashid Amir's album Graffiti Lips
(2018) "Loot" from the album Speakeazy Suave-Ski featuring Sadat X
(2019) "Anti Mumble Rap" DJ Symphony featuring Sadat X & Ceazar
(2020) "Real Hip-Hop" - DJ Symphony featuring Jeru the Damaja, Psycho Les & Sadat X
(2021) "Riot Gear" - Ben Shorr & DJ Boogie Blind featuring Sadat X of Brand Nubian & Edo.G aka Ed O.G.
(2021) "Sadat X's Interlude (Feat. Sadat X)" - Sun Gin featuring Sadat X


== References ==


== External links ==
Sadat X at AllMusicSaga is an American MC who grew up in Canarsie, Brooklyn, New York and now resides in Red Hook, Brooklyn, New York. He is from Italian American and Puerto Rican descent. He is the son of Richard Quarantello, a former gang member, musician and writer. 
He is a vegan of fifteen years, and practices yoga and meditation.


== Music career ==
Saga first song to ever release is "Think Of You Now" produced by close friend Marco Polo (producer) who invited him on his compilation album fr:The Stupendous Adventures of Marco Polo released on Duck Down Music.
"For a long time it just felt like the music industry was just – like I was on the shore and I was just watching the ships set sail. It was such a departure from the music that I love, from the version of Hip Hop that I love."A few years later, Saga and producer Marco Polo kept working progressively on more music without any pretensions at first but then having a full batch of tracks that became a 10 songs album called "From Out of the Shadows". In March 2015, The first single of this project "City Streets" featured Roc Marciano then the full 10 songs album came out in April 2015.In May 2015, Saga released an EP titled "Saga Ghanoush" which is an hommage to Alchemist "Israeli Salad" instrumental album.Since then Saga has been releasing series of single with producers like Marco Polo, Ayatollah, Exile and French producer 20Syl.
Saga announced for 2017 an upcoming EP with Chicago producer Thelonious Martin and an album with Virginia native Grammy Award-winning producer Nottz.


== Touring career ==
The Ecology European Tour w/ Fashawn and Exile (Sept 2015)
Live From Brooklyn Japan Tour w/Marco Polo and DJ Skizz (Nov 2015)
Rawther European Tour w/ Asher Roth and Nottz (April 2016)


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===
From Out of the Shadows (with Marco Polo) (2015)
Molotov (with Thelonious Martin) (2017)
Agassi (2020)


=== EPs ===
Saga Ghanoush (with The Alchemist) (2015)
Hagler (2019)
Six Demon Bag (2021)


=== Singles ===
"Tell Me" produced by Marco Polo
"If We" produced by Ayatollah
"UP" featuring Blu produced by 20syl (2016)
"What You Want" produced by Exile
"Pretty Thing" produced by Agassi (2016)
"The Warrior" produced by Quincey Tones (2016)


=== Guest appearances ===
"Think Of You Now" on Marco Polo - fr:The Stupendous Adventures Of Marco Polo (2010)
"The Hard Way" featuring fr:Ty Farris on Apollo Brown - fr:Grandeur (album) (2015)
"Geppetto"(remix) featuring Evidence on DJ Skizz "Cruise Control" (2016)
"Fuck You" feat Sly Johnson on Tagi and Steven Beatberg "You Are Surrounded" (2017)


== References ==Brian Daniel Carenard (born July 13, 1977), better known by his stage name Saigon, is an American rapper. After years of delay due to former record label interference his debut album The Greatest Story Never Told (2011) was released on Suburban Noize Records. He is also known for his appearances on the HBO television series Entourage.


== Life and career ==
Born to an African-American mother and a father from Port-au-Prince, Haiti, Saigon was raised in Spring Valley, NY and was sentenced to jail time at Napanoch's Eastern Correctional Facility in the late 1990s, serving a sentence for first-degree assault after shooting at someone in a bar. One day while in the recreation yard, Brian met a fellow inmate named Hakim, who rapped and had a reputation for incorporating positive messages, and heavy use of prestigious vocabulary in his rhymes. Carenard would later state that battle rapping with Hakim would help instigate his personal rehabilitation, as he set a course for redemption through hip hop music. While serving time, Brian named himself "Saigon" after reading Wallace Terry's book about the Vietnam War. This book helped realign the content and diction in Saigon's raps, as well as the advice of a prison lifer: "There's no right way to do wrong." Saigon was eventually released from prison in 2000, and immediately recorded mixtapes, with the goal of obtaining a record contract as a means to release a debut album, which he wanted to be titled "The Greatest Story Never Told".With the help of the underground buzz that he garnered over the years, Saigon signed a record deal with Atlantic Records in 2004, and released his debut single titled “Pain In  My Life” produced by DJ Cocoa Chanelle in 2006. Despite the co-sign from producer Just Blaze and collaborations with several acclaimed rap artists such as Jay-Z, Kanye West and Kool G Rap, Saigon's record label repeatedly balked at setting a release date for his debut album. Saigon revealed that he realized as early as two months into his deal with Atlantic Records that there were problems. He later recalled how his early excitement at signing to the same label that "had so much history with black music, like Aretha Franklin and Ray Charles" was quickly dampened when they suggested he record a radio-friendly song with the Miami-based R&B quartet, Pretty Ricky. He also recalled a meeting with an Atlantic executive who told him "We need our three singles, then you can bust your artistic nut on the rest of the album." Saigon however, wasn't willing to compromise with this request, and only one year after signing with Atlantic, he hired a lawyer to work out a release from his label. He explained "They signed me knowing the kind of music I was making, but then they try and change the direction".
This however didn't prompt a break from his record company, as they offered a few stipends, leading him and his fans to believe they'd still eventually put the record out. Saigon later suspected that Atlantic wanted to make sure he didn't take the material elsewhere and benefit from the buzz he'd created. While caught in this issue with Atlantic, Saigon continued to perform freestyles on hip hop radio shows, release mixtapes, and also continued to write and record The Greatest Story Never Told. Despite not having an official album out, Saigon gradually became somewhat of a high-profile hip hop artist, as he appeared on the covers of several magazines and had a recurring role playing himself on the hit HBO show Entourage. Saigon was also managed by celebrity manager Glenn Toby. In 2007, he was featured on the first XXL Freshman Class.
In 2009, Saigon signed with Boston-based new media outfit and independent label Amalgam Digital.On April 14, 2014, Saigon announced the formation of his own record label – Squid Ink Squad Records, partnering with global digital media company CPXi. On July 28, 2014, it was announced that Saigon's third studio album would release on September 30, 2014.In 2020, it was announced that Saigon had signed to Tech N9ne's label Strange Music. His first project under the label was the EP, 777: The Resurrection.


== Personal life ==
On the night of January 17, 2006, Saigon was stabbed in the temple with a wine bottle as he left a diner in Chelsea, Manhattan, NYC. A man approached Saigon and attempted to steal a chain off his neck. When Saigon grabbed it back, a fight started. Saigon, bleeding from the head, tried to hail down a taxi, but was unsuccessful.  As a result, Saigon ended up driving himself to Bellevue Hospital where he received seven stitches. At the end of 2008, Saigon became a father.  His daughter's name is Rayne Dior Carenard and she was the inspiration for his single "Fatherhood". She also appears in the music video of the song, which was directed by Derek Pike.Further details of his personal life emerged with his participation in the fourth season of reality TV show Love & Hip Hop: New York, where it was revealed that he also has a son (born to Erica Jean, not the same mother as the daughter mentioned above).


=== Feud with Prodigy ===
On the night of September 19, 2007, after an impromptu performance by Saigon during a Mobb Deep show, words were exchanged between Saigon and Prodigy of Mobb Deep.  This escalated into an argument, which resulted with Saigon punching Prodigy twice in the face.  Two video versions of the events have since emerged. One version with slow motion footage shows a clear look of Saigon punching Prodigy, while another video being endorsed by Mobb Deep shows Saigon being chased and running out of the club. The feud has apparently died down, since Saigon had expressed happiness that Prodigy was coming home, in an interview two months before the rappers release. However Saigon kept the animosity going through his Facebook page, commenting on the recent situation between Mobb Deep (one half of Mobb Deep, Havoc, had allegedly spoke of Prodigy in a hostile manner through Twitter. However, he has since denied that he did so, and stated that his Twitter account was hacked at the time).


== Discography ==

Studio albumsThe Greatest Story Never Told (2011)
The Greatest Story Never Told Chapter 2: Bread and Circuses (2012)
G.S.N.T. 3: The Troubled Times of Brian Carenard (2014)
Pain, Peace & Prosperity (2021)Extended plays777: The Resurrection (2020)


== Filmography ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Official Label Artist Page on Suburban Noize Records
Saigon at IMDb
In Arms Reach charity organization
Abandoned Nation organization
[1] Saigon New Mixtape One foot In the GraveCheryl Renee James (born March 28, 1966), better known by her stage name Salt, is an American rapper. She is best known as a member of the female rap trio Salt-N-Pepa, which also includes Pepa (Sandra Denton) and Spinderella (Deidra "Dee Dee" Roper). James starred in The Salt-N-Pepa Show, a reality TV series focusing on reforming the group; which aired on the VH1 network in 2008.


== Early life ==
The daughter of a transit worker and Barbara James, a bank manager, James was born in Brooklyn, New York City. The middle of three children, James grew up in the Bushwick section of Brooklyn. James attended Grover Cleveland High School, graduating in 1983. After high school, James enrolled at Queensborough Community College to study nursing. James met Queens-native Sandra Denton in 1985 while attending college.


== Career ==
After forming a friendship with Denton, James' then-boyfriend and co-worker Hurby Azor approached the pair and asked them to record a rap for a  class project. With Azor's guidance as their manager, James and Denton then formed the group "Super Nature" (which eventually changed to "Salt N' Pepa") and  were joined by Latoya Hanson who was replaced by Deidra Roper joined in 1987. They released five studio albums: Hot, Cool & Vicious (1986), A Salt with a Deadly Pepa (1988), Blacks' Magic (1990), Very Necessary (1993), and Brand New (1997). Salt also co-starred in the 1993 motion picture Who's the Man?. In 1997, she recorded the song "Stomp" with gospel artists Kirk Franklin and God's Property for their album God's Property, one of the bestselling albums in gospel music history. They were the first female rap act to have gold, platinum, and multi-platinum albums, and the first female rap act to win a Grammy. The group disbanded in 2002 but reformed in 2008.
James appeared on VH1's inaugural Hip Hop Honors program in November 2004, along with Pepa, but they did not perform. Salt, Pepa, and Spinderella, however, did perform on the second Hip Hop Honors on September 22, 2005, performing their hit "Whatta Man". This was the trio's first performance as Salt-N-Pepa since 1999. On October 23, 2008, Salt-N-Pepa performed "Shoop", "Push It", and "Whatta Man" at the 2008 BET Hip Hop Awards. In 2009, James was featured in the Generation Gospel Exclusive on 106 & Gospel.


== Personal life ==
James dated Salt-N-Pepa group manager Hurby Azor during the early start of the group from 1984 until 1989. James married her husband Gavin Wray on Christmas Eve 2000, although they dated for ten years before the marriage. James and Wray have two children.James and her daughter are referenced in Tupac's song "Keep Ya Head Up". In an interview James stated she considers herself a feminist "in a way", emphasizing the need for women to avoid complete emotional and financial dependence on men. Songs like "Tramp" and "Shake Your Thang" by Salt-N-Pepa express such feminist themes as female autonomy. She was baptized into the Seventh-day Adventist Church on a mission trip in Ethiopia with Oakwood College.


== Discography ==

Studio albumsHot, Cool & Vicious (1986)
A Salt with a Deadly Pepa (1988)
Blacks' Magic (1990)
Very Necessary (1993)
Brand New (1997)


== References ==


== External links ==
Salt-N-Pepa official website
Cheryl James at IMDbLaRon Louis James (born February 18, 1982), better known by his stage name Juelz Santana, is an American rapper and member of East Coast hip hop group The Diplomats, also known as Dipset. He is best known for his appearances on Cam'ron's 2002 singles, "Oh Boy" and "Hey Ma", which peaked at numbers 4 and 3 on the Billboard Hot 100 respectively, as well as Chris Brown's 2005 triple-platinum single, "Run It!", which topped the Billboard Hot 100 for five weeks.His albums, From Me to U (2003) and What the Game's Been Missing! (2005) peaked at number 8 and number 9 on the Billboard 200 respectively, the latter containing the platinum single, "There It Go (The Whistle Song)".
In December 2018, Santana was sentenced to 27 months in prison for carrying an unconcealed weapon in his bag at an airport. He was released early from prison on August 5, 2020, after serving 19 of his 27-month sentence.


== Early life ==
LaRon James was born in New York City to African-American parents. He was raised in the Sugar Hill, Harlem section of Manhattan and began rapping at the age of 5. He cites a live-in Dominican godmother as a strong influence on his early upbringing.


== Career ==


=== Beginnings (1994–2001) ===
At 12, James formed the rap duo, Draftpick, with Malik, a neighbourhood friend. The group first gained recognition after several performances around New York City, including Amateur Night at the Apollo Theater, where they won two weeks in a row. The two got signed to Priority Records when James was 15 years old. They released one single on the label, "Play Ruff", with Memphis Bleek and Tracey Lee.In 1998, James was introduced to Cam'ron through his cousin,  and shortly thereafter, took on the name Juelz Santana and became a member of his hip hop collective, The Diplomats, alongside Jim Jones and Freekey Zekey. Santana's first collaboration with the group was the Trackmasters remix of "What Means the World to You", followed by the tracks "Double Up" and "All the Chickens", on Cam'ron's second studio album, S.D.E., released on September 19, 2000, through Epic Records.


=== From Me to U (2002–2003) ===
In 2001, Cam'ron signed to Roc-a-Fella Records and released his third studio album, Come Home with Me, on May 14, 2002, which featured further collaborations with Santana, including "Welcome to New York City", "Hey Ma" and "Oh Boy", which earned Santana his first Grammy Award nomination for Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group at the 2003 Grammy Awards.
Cam'ron's signing also led to Santana signing a deal with Roc-a-Fella, under the imprint Diplomat Records. After four mixtapes, the group released their first album on Diplomatic Immunity on March 25, 2003, which debuted at number 8 on the Billboard 200, selling 92,000 copies in its first week and eventually being certified Gold by the RIAA. Santana caused a minor controversy before the album's release when he described himself as a "young Mohammed Atta" on a leaked version of the track "I Love You", just months after the September 11 attacks. In a retrospective, Complex named the album one of the classic albums of the decade.On August 19, 2003, Santana released his debut album, From Me to U, which peaked at number 8 in the Billboard 200. The album was preceded by the mixtape, Final Destination, released on June 17, 2003, and the single "Dipset (Santana's Town)", which peaked at number 70 on the Billboard Top 100, received a nomination for Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group at the 46th Grammy Awards.


=== What the Game's Been Missing! (2004–2006) ===
Following disputes at the label between Cam'ron and Roc-A-Fella Records head Jay-Z, the Diplomats severed ties with Roc-A-Fella and Def Jam and signed to independent label Koch Records. The group released their second album, Diplomatic Immunity 2, on November 23, 2004, with new members Hell Rell, 40 Cal., and J. R. Writer.
On December 23, 2004, Santana released "Mic Check", the lead single from his sophomore album. The single peaked at number 35 on the Billboard Hot 100.In April 2005, Santana announced that he had returned to Def Jam and signed a new joint-venture deal with them. On May 29, 2005, Santana released the album second single, "There It Go (The Whistle Song)", which became his highest-charting single to date, peaking at number 6 on the Hot 100 and number 3 on the Hot Rap tracks charts. A third single, "Oh Yes", reached number 56 on the Hot 100 and number 8 on the Rap charts, and a fourth, "Clockwork" peaked at number 68. On June 30, 2005, Santana was featured on Chris Brown's "Run It!", which went to number one on the Billboard Hot 100 for five weeks.
On November 22, 2005, Santana released What the Game's Been Missing!, his second album. Both the album and the single "There It Go" were certified Gold by the RIAA.


=== Unreleased Born to Lose, Built to Win album, Skull Gang, collaborations, mixtapes and Love & Hip Hop: New York appearances (2007–2016) ===
In 2007, rifts and disagreements between the various Dipset members was beyond repair and the group disbanded. In August 2008, it was reported that Cam'ron had sold his contract to Def Jam, leaving Santana to form the hip hop collective Skull Gang and label imprint Skull Gang Entertainment. The group released the mixtapes Takeover on September 19, 2008, and the Christmas-themed A Tribute to Bad Santa Starring Mike Epps with Jim Jones on November 25, 2008, before their debut album, Skull Gang, was released on May 5, 2009.
In 2008, Santana began working on his third album, Born to Lose, Built to Win. Despite several single releases, including 2007's "The Second Coming" with Just Blaze, 2009's "Mixin' Up the Medicine" with Yelawolf and "Back to the Crib" with Chris Brown, the album was never released. During this time, Juelz' contributions to Lil Wayne's Tha Carter III led to his third Grammy Award nomination, Album of the Year at the 2009 Grammy Awards.
In April 2010, Cam'ron and Jim Jones officially announced the end of their feud, and the Diplomats reunited for several singles after signing with Interscope Records. In 2011 and 2012, Santana made brief appearances on the first two seasons of VH1 reality series Love & Hip Hop: New York, alongside other Dipset group members and their significant others.
On December 21, 2012, Santana announced the release of the mixtape God Will'n, his first solo project in eight years. It was released on January 14, 2013, with XXL later naming it the 9th best mixtape of the year. It was preceded by the singles "Bodies" featuring Lil Reese, and "Soft" featuring Fabolous, Rick Ross and Meek Mill. Santana also released music videos for "Nobody Knows" featuring Future, "Awesome" featuring Wale, and "Everything Is Good" featuring Wiz Khalifa, saying that he had shot music videos for every song on the tape. A month later, Santana announced his collaboration with Queens-based clothing brand collective, S.B.O.E (Slow Bucks Over Everything), with the release of the mixtape All We Got Is Us.In November 2016, Santana joined the supporting cast of Love & Hip Hop: New York in its seventh season, releasing the freestyle "Up In The Studio Gettin Blown".


=== Dipset reunion and Love & Hip Hop: New York comeback (2017–present) ===
On November 21, 2017, Santana, Cam'ron, Jim Jones and Freekey Zekey reunited onstage for a performance at the Hammerstein Ballroom. In 2018, the group went on a national tour, Dipset Forever, and released their third album, Diplomatic Ties on November 22, 2018.In November 2018, Santana returned to Love & Hip Hop: New York as a main cast member for its ninth season, which chronicled his ongoing legal struggles.


== Personal life ==
On November 23, 2018, Santana proposed to urban model and video vixen Kimbella Vandehee during the Diplomats show at the Apollo Theater. They married on January 10, 2019.
Santana and Vanderhee were in an on-again, off-again relationship since 2009 and have three children together, Juelz James, Bella Monroe James, and Santana James. Santana also has a son from a previous relationship, LaRon Jr., born in 2003.


=== Legal issues ===
In January 2011, Santana's recording studio in Bergenfield, New Jersey, was raided after a 10-month investigation by the Bergen County Prosecutor's Office and Gang Unit. They discovered two loaded 9 mm handguns, boxes of ammunition and 84 grams of marijuana.On February 2, 2011, Santana was arrested and charged with possession of a firearm, possession of a handgun without a permit, possession of a controlled dangerous substance and possession with intent to distribute a controlled substance within 1,000 feet of a school. On March 22, 2011, Santana missed a performance at Chris Brown's record release party when he was stopped and searched by police. In November 2011 he was charged with making terrorist threats and disorderly conduct.In March 2018, Santana fled Newark Liberty International Airport, leaving his passport, identification and luggage behind after Transportation Security Administration Officers examining his carry-on luggage found a loaded .38-caliber handgun inside of his bag, as well as eight oxycodone pills. After going on the run for three days, Santana turned himself into the custody of the Port Authority Police Department on March 12. On March 26, Santana was denied bail.Santana was released from custody on April 6, 2018, when his mother posted $500,000 bail after putting her house up. He was ordered to remain in the custody of his mother and remained on house arrest at his mother's residence in New Jersey while he awaited a federal trial. He was later allowed to travel and perform with the rest of The Diplomats on their 2018 reunion tour, under the condition that his mother accompanied him at all times. On December 18, Santana was sentenced to 27 months in prison followed by one year of supervised release. Santana began serving his sentence at the medium security FCI Petersburg in Hopewell, Virginia on March 1, 2019. Santana was released from prison early on August 5, 2020, after serving 19 months of his 27-month sentence.


== Discography ==

Studio albums

From Me to U (2003)
What the Game's Been Missing! (2005)


== Filmography ==
State Property 2 (2005)
Killa Season (2006)
Kiss and Tail: The Hollywood Jumpoff (2009)
The Project (2011)
Video Girl (2011)
Love & Hip Hop: New York (2016–2019)


== References ==Todd Eric Gaither (born September 6, 1969) also known as Sauce Money, is a rapper who worked with Jay-Z in his early career. He was also featured on Big Daddy Kane's album Daddy's Home; he appears on the track "Show N' Prove", alongside Scoob Lover, Jay-Z, Shyheim the Rugged Child, and Ol' Dirty Bastard of the Wu-Tang Clan.


== Career ==
He was featured on Jay-Z's debut album, Reasonable Doubt, on the DJ Premier-produced "Bring It On", on In My Lifetime, Vol. 1, on the track "Face Off", and on Jay Z's third album, Vol. 2... Hard Knock Life, on the track "Reservoir Dogs" with The LOX and Beanie Sigel.
Gaither is credited as a co-writer for Puff Daddy's single "I'll Be Missing You".
He released his debut album, Middle Finger U, on Priority Records and EMI in 2000. The album featured two guest spots: one from Jay-Z ("Pregame") and another from Puff Daddy ("Do You See"); it also includes one track produced by DJ Premier. He released one single from this album, "For My Hustlaz". In 2004, he was featured on the single "Easy" from New Zealand DJ/producer P-Money's album Magic City. In 2006, he appeared at Jay Z's I Declare War concert to perform "Reservoir Dogs".
Sauce Money released a single entitled "Listen 2 Me" in 2008. It sampled the Oompa-Loompas from the 1971 film Willy Wonka & the Chocolate Factory. The song was made available on Sauce Money's MySpace page.
Sauce Money makes occasional appearances on mixtapes, especially those coordinated by DJ Kay Slay. Among the rappers he has appeared on DJ Kay Slay-facilitated posse cuts with include Ghostface Killah, Raekwon, Redman, Kool G Rap, Royce Da 5’9”, Crooked I, AZ, Styles P, Black Thought, Busta Rhymes, Sheek Louch, Rah Digga, Layzie Bone, Bun B, Joell Ortiz, DJ Paul, Rah Digga, E-40, Grandmaster Caz, Coke La Rock, Melle Mel, Ice-T, E-A-Ski, MC Serch, Herb McGruff, Superlover Cee, Stan Spit, 3D Na’Tee, Merkules, and Big Daddy Kane, among many others. He appeared on both 2020’s “Rolling 50 Deep” and 2021’s “Rolling 110 Deep”, and was chosen to perform the very last verse on the latter.


== Discography ==

Studio albums2000: Middle Finger U


== References ==


== External links ==
Allmusic entry
Sauce money bioSierra Lewis, (born December 12, 2000), known professionally as Scar Lip, is an American rapper. Her 2022 single "Glizzy Gobbler" went viral on TikTok and she was signed to Epic Records the following year after releasing her breakout single "This is New York".


== Life and career ==
Sierra Lewis was born in Bronx, New York City and raised in Brooklyn, New York City. She began writing poetry from a young age. At age 12, her mother died after getting into a hit and run car accident. At age 16, she got a scar on her lip after her brother punched her in the mouth while she tried to get into her house; the scar later became the basis for her stage name. According to her, she was abused by her aunt and uncle while living with them. She was eventually kicked out of her aunt's house and put into foster care, which led to her often moving between foster homes and detention centers in places such as Pennsylvania and Coney Island. She was first inspired to pursue music by her admiration for rapper DMX and posted her first rap video online in 2018, which went viral online the following year. Her first three songs, "Therapy", "Suicide Awareness", and "Foster Care", were recorded from 2019 to 2020.Scar Lip first gained popularity with her 2022 single "Glizzy Gobbler", which went viral on TikTok as a meme. Her single "This is New York" was produced by NY Bangers and was released in April 2023, the same month that she was featured on the Swizz Beatz, Jadakiss, and Benny the Butcher song "Take 'Em Out" from Swizz Beatz's extended play (EP) Hip Hop 50: Vol. 2. "This is New York" became popular on TikTok and soon became her breakout hit, while a remix featuring Snoop Dogg titled "This is Cali" was released in May 2023. She was signed to Epic Records in June 2023. Scar Lip's upcoming debut EP, Scars & Stripes, will be produced entirely by Swizz Beatz.


== Musical style ==
Scar Lip's music is primarily New York hip hop and gangsta rap. She has listed DMX, the hip hop group Onyx, and rapper Cardi B as influences on her music and described her sound as "hardcore aggression".


== Discography ==
Extended PlaysScars & Stripes (TBA)


=== Singles ===


==== As lead artist ====


==== As featured artist ====


== References ==Jesse Bonds Weaver Jr. (born June 22, 1962), better known by the stage name Schoolly D (sometimes spelled Schooly D), is an American rapper from Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.


== Career ==
Schoolly D teamed up with DJ Code Money in the mid-1980s. His lyrics reflected urban realism, violence, and sexual bravado. He was interviewed in the 1986 documentary Big Fun in the Big Town. He later embraced an Afrocentric style, bringing Afrocentric culture to hip hop along with KRS-One.Schoolly D contributed songs and music to many Abel Ferrara films, including "P.S.K." and "Saturday Night" (from Saturday Night! – The Album) as well as "King of New York" to Ferrara's film of the same name and the title track from Am I Black Enough For You? that was played during the climactic shoot-out in that film, the title track from How a Black Man Feels, and "Signifying Rapper" (from Smoke Some Kill), which was used in Ferrara's film Bad Lieutenant. Because Led Zeppelin successfully sued due to an uncleared interpolation  of their song "Kashmir" in "Signifying Rapper", the song was omitted from the soundtrack of the film and from subsequent releases of the film.Composer Joe Delia tapped Schoolly to co-write and record "The Player" for Ferrara's film The Blackout, which Delia scored.  Schoolly also wrote the score to Ferrara's 'R Xmas. In 2006, Schoolly D co-wrote the indie film soundtrack of the historical science fiction thriller Order of the Quest with Chuck Treece. The project series is produced by Benjamin Barnett, and Jay D Clark of Media Bureau. His last album, Funk 'N Pussy, on Jeff "Met" Thies' Chord Recordings features guest appearances by Public Enemy's Chuck D, Chuck Chillout, Lady B and a drum and bass remix of the classic Schoolly D track "Mr. Big Dick" (remixed by UK trip hop crew The Sneaker Pimps).
Schoolly also performed the music and occasional narration for the cult animated series Aqua Teen Hunger Force on the Cartoon Network's Adult Swim programming block. He was a guest on a first-season episode of Space Ghost Coast to Coast. He also created the song "Sharkian Nights" for the Adult Swim series 12 oz. Mouse. The character Jesse B. Weaver from The Rudy and Gogo World Famous Cartoon Show was also named after him.
In November 2006 Schoolly D and Cartoon Network were sued over the Aqua Teen Hunger Force theme music. A drummer by the name of Terence Yerves claimed he had also written the theme music alongside Schoolly D in 1999 while working at the Meat Locker Studio. Yerves was aware the song would be used for a television series but did not approve of it being used for Aqua Teen Hunger Force, however, did not file the copyright to the Library of Congress until May 2006, after the series' fourth season had already started airing. In the lawsuit Yerves demanded he receive $150,000 for every time the series was aired after the lawsuit was filed, he also demanded that all existing copies of the series' DVDs be impounded and for Aqua Teen Hunger Force to cease broadcast.On December 30, 2022 he released his newest album, Cause Schoolly D Is Crazy.


== Legacy ==
Rapper Ice-T, who is often given credit for the creation of gangsta rap, discussed Schoolly D's influence on him in his autobiography:
The first record that came out along those lines was Schoolly D's "P.S.K." Then the syncopation of that rap was used by me when I made "6 in the Mornin'." The vocal delivery was the same: "...P.S.K. is makin' that green," "...six in the morning, police at my door." When I heard that record I was like, "Oh shit!" and call it a bite or what you will but I dug that record. My record didn't sound like "P.S.K.," but I liked the way he was flowing with it. "P.S.K." was talking about Park Side Killers but it was very vague. That was the only difference, when Schoolly did it, it was "...one by one, I'm knockin' em out." All he did was represent a gang on his record. I took that and wrote a record about guns, beating people down, and all that with "6 in the Mornin'." 


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===

1985: Schoolly D
1986: Saturday Night! – The Album
1988: Smoke Some Kill
1989: Am I Black Enough for You?
1991: How a Black Man Feels
1994: Welcome to America
1995: Reservoir Dog
2000: Funk 'N Pussy
2010: International Supersport
2019: The Real Hardcore
2022: Cause Schoolly D Is Crazy


=== Compilations ===
1987: The Adventures of Schoolly D
1995: The Jive Collection, Vol. 3
1996: A Gangster's Story: 1984–1996
2000: Best on Wax (5 Years of Schoolly D)
2003: The Best of Schoolly D


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Baker, Soren (2018). The History of Gangster Rap: From Schoolly D to Kendrick Lamar, the Rise of a Great American Art Form. Abrams Books. ISBN 978-1-4197-2915-7.


== External links ==
Schoolly D at IMDb
Schoolly D at AllMusic
Schoolly D discography at Discogs 
Schoolly D's ArtistDirect entry
Global Darkness interviews
Article about his graphic career as an album cover designerJill Heather Scott (born April 4, 1972) is an American singer, songwriter, model, poet, and actress. Her 2000 debut album, Who Is Jill Scott?: Words and Sounds Vol. 1, went platinum and the follow-ups Beautifully Human: Words and Sounds Vol. 2 (2004) and The Real Thing: Words and Sounds Vol. 3 (2007) both achieved gold status.
Scott made her film debut in 2007 in Hounddog and Tyler Perry's Why Did I Get Married?. In 2008, she starred in the BBC/HBO series The No. 1 Ladies' Detective Agency, based on the novels of the same name by Alexander McCall Smith. After a four-year hiatus from music, Scott released her fourth album, The Light of the Sun, in 2011. In 2014, she starred in the film Get on Up as Deidre "Dee Dee" Jenkins, the second wife of James Brown. In 2015, she released her fifth album, Woman. Beginning in 2018, Scott appeared in The CW DC Comics superhero series Black Lightning as Lady Eve.


== Early life ==
Scott was born on April 4, 1972, in Philadelphia. She grew up an only child in a North Philadelphia neighborhood, raised by her mother, Joyce Scott, and her grandmother. She recalls her happy childhood, saying she was "very much a loved child". Jill Scott's maternal ancestry has been traced to the Jola people of Guinea-Bissau. She was raised as a Jehovah's Witness.After graduating from the Philadelphia High School for Girls, Scott attended Temple University. While working two jobs she studied secondary education. She planned to become a high school English teacher. However, after three years of study and then working as a teacher's aide, Scott became disillusioned with a teaching career and she dropped out of college.


== Career ==


=== 2000–09: Words and Sounds albums ===
Scott began her performing career as a spoken word artist, appearing at live poetry readings to perform her work. She was eventually discovered by Ahmir "Questlove" Thompson of the Roots. Questlove invited her to join the band in the studio. The collaboration resulted in a co-writing credit for Scott on the song, "You Got Me". In 2000, Erykah Badu and the Roots won a Grammy for Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group for "You Got Me", and Scott debuted as an artist during a Roots live show, singing as original artist/singer of the song. Afterwards Scott collaborated with Eric Benet, Will Smith, and Common; she broadened her performing experience by touring Canada in a production of the Broadway musical Rent.
Scott was the first artist signed to Steve McKeever's 'Hidden Beach Recordings' label. Her debut album, Who Is Jill Scott?: Words and Sounds Vol. 1 was released in 2000. She experienced some notice and chart success with the single "A Long Walk," eventually earning a Grammy nomination in early 2003 for Best Female Vocal Performance. Scott lost that award, but won a 2005 Grammy for Best Urban/Alternative R&B Performance for "Cross My Mind". The live album, Experience: Jill Scott 826+, was released November 2001. Scott's second full-length album, Beautifully Human: Words and Sounds Vol. 2, followed in 2004.
Scott continues to write poetry; a compilation volume of her poems, The Moments, The Minutes, The Hours, was published and released by St. Martin's Press in April 2005.In early 2007, Scott was featured on the George Benson and Al Jarreau collaboration single "God Bless The Child" (written by Billie Holiday), which earned Scott her second Grammy (for Best Traditional R&B Vocal Performance) at the 2007 Grammy Awards ceremony. Scott shared the win with Benson and Jarreau. In 2006, Scott was prominently featured on hip hop artist Lupe Fiasco's single "Daydreaming," which won a 2008 Grammy for Best Urban/Alternative Performance and also appeared on a new Scott collection called Collaborations on January 30, 2007.The Collaborations collection served as "an appetizer" for her next studio album, The Real Thing: Words and Sounds Vol. 3 released September 25, 2007. A clip of the title track was released on a bonus disc from Hidden Beach Records and included with Collaborations. The lead single "Hate on Me" gained airplay in May 2007, with a video released in mid-July. In advance of the album's release, Hidden Beach released a 17-minute album sampler through their forums. Interspersed between the dozen songs previewed on the sampler was a personal explanation from Jill for the inspiration behind some of her songs.
In 2008, Scott released her second live album, Live in Paris+, which consists of 8 songs recorded during her set list of the "Big Beautiful Tour" in Europe. The bonus DVD contains the same concert, plus some live cuts from The Real Thing: Words and Sounds Vol. 3. In the same year, "Whenever You're Around," a single from The Real Thing, which features George Duke was a moderate hit on urban radio.


=== 2010–12: Hidden Beach lawsuit, The Light of the Sun, and tour ===
Early in 2010, Scott was sued by Hidden Beach Records for leaving halfway through her six-album contract and owing millions of dollars in damages. The label's founder, Steve McKeever, claimed that he helped launch Scott's career and nurtured her into a Grammy-winning singer-songwriter but was unceremoniously dumped in October after a 10-year plus relationship. Scott, however countersued in response.
To offset the damages Hidden Beach planned to release several compilation albums consisting of previously unreleased material by Scott. The first album in this series was The Original Jill Scott from the Vault, Vol. 1. Previously titled Just Before Dawn, the album was asked to be paused by Scott so that fans would not get confused with the new material she was releasing, especially the new studio album The Light of the Sun, which was also being released around that time under a distribution deal that Scott and Warner Brothers signed in early 2011. The deal gives Scott direct control over her marketing and promotions and releases her music under her imprint of Blues Babe Records. She also signed a multi-tour deal with Live Nation to expand her concert touring.
The Light of the Sun officially began production in 2010. Scott gave fans a preview of the music on her 18-city venue, co-headlining tour with R&B singer Maxwell, entitled Maxwell & Jill Scott: The Tour. After the tour, Scott began studio sessions with the album's executive producer, JR Hutson. Recording sessions took place in several locations, including 9th Street Studios, Studio 609, Fever Recording Studios in North Hollywood, California, Threshold Sound & Vision in Santa Monica, California, and The Studio in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, The Boom Boom Room in Burbank, California, and The Village Studios in West Los Angeles, California. It features collaborations from Anthony Hamilton, Eve, Doug E Fresh, and Paul Wall. The album was released for pre-order days before it was officially released on June 21, 2011. It debuted at No. 1 on the US Billboard 200 chart, with 135,000 copies sold in its first week, becoming her first No. 1 debut on the chart.
The album was preceded by the promo single "Shame," which was released on Scott's SoundCloud account in April 2012. The single features the rapper Eve and R&B trio The A-Group. The video was released on Essence.com on April 13. The album's official debut single was "So in Love" featuring Anthony Hamilton. It was released in April and debuted at No. 43 on the US Billboard Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart, Scott's highest debut on that chart. It peaked at No. 10 and tied a record with Maxwell's "Fortunate" for spending 14 weeks at No. 1 on the Urban Adult Contemporary Chart.
Scott promoted the album in several ways, including The Light of the Sundays, several online Essence interviews, and releasing the album as an iTunes LP, giving fans paid access to exclusive photos and videos. Scott also embarked on her Summer Block Party tour sponsored by Budweiser's Superfest. The tour was a hit, selling out venues throughout the country with opening acts Anthony Hamilton and legendary group Mint Condition. It also featured Doug E Fresh as the host and DJ Jazzy Jeff as the DJ. The album's second official single, "So Gone (What My Mind Says)," featuring Paul Wall, was released in August 2011, and the video premiered on September 13 on E! Online. It peaked at No. 28 on the US Billboard Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart. Scott also released a video for the song "Hear My Call". The project gained Scott four NAACP Image Awards including Outstanding Female Artist, Outstanding Music Video (for "Hear My Call"), Outstanding Song (for "So in Love"), and Outstanding Album (for the whole of The Light of the Sun).


=== 2015 fifth studio album "Woman" ===
During her performance at the Essence Festival, Scott indicated the intention of releasing an album of lullabies. Her album Woman is the first album she released on Atlantic Records. The album debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 Albums Chart, with 58,000 copies sold in its first week.


=== 2020–present: Verzuz battle ===
On May 9, 2020, Jill Scott and Erykah Badu came together for the first live stream battle between women. During the three-hour Instagram live, the two friends live streamed their hits as well as songs they had written for other artists. More than 700,000 viewers tuned in to the battle, including Michelle Obama, Spike Lee, Quincy Jones and Janet Jackson.


=== Other appearances and songwriting ===
Her live performance in 2004 with members of The Roots, which also includes a joint performance with Erykah Badu, is featured in Dave Chappelle's 2006 concert film, Dave Chappelle's Block Party.
UK dance duo Goldtrix covered Scott's song "It's Love", renaming it "It's Love (Trippin')" with singer Andrea Brown taking over vocal duties. The song became a top ten hit in the UK, peaking at number six.
Jill is also featured on a Lupe Fiasco song named "Daydreaming". "It's Love (Trippin')" was also covered by South West Beats (featuring Claudia Patrice) in 2008. The song "Golden" is featured in a R&B themed radio station in the Rockstar Games video game Grand Theft Auto IV. She recently appeared on Pharoahe Monch's 2011 release W.A.R. (We Are Renegades). Also Jill is one of the featured artists in Kirk Franklin's video "I Smile" released in 2011. In 2012 rapper Substantial released "Jackin' Jill". The album was recorded as a tribute to Jill's voice and songwriting. In 2015, she was featured on Dr. Dre's third album. In 2016, she was featured on The Hamilton Mixtape.


== Style ==
Scott is a soprano who has infused jazz, opera, R&B, spoken word, and hip hop in a style often called neo-soul. A reviewer at Pop Matters, referring to Scott's vocal ability (1st soprano), stated, "Scott draws on her upper register, recalling the artistry of the late 'songbird' Minnie Riperton and Deniece Williams." The same reviewer, in another article, stated, "The song evokes the artistry of Minnie Riperton as Scott sings in the upper register that makes its only appearances on 'Who is Jill Scott?' on the teasing 'I Think It's Better' and 'Show Me'." Other reviewers have celebrated her for "putting bass in her soprano voice," "elegant vocals," "warm womanliness" and "populat[ing] her music with images of regular people".
For some, she was "the girl-next-door for a different side of America". Reviewer Anupa Mistry writes: "Scott’s attention to conversations and consciousness in her particular community and black America at large solidified her music as being of the people. She wrote about hip-hop, jazz, reparations, Abrahamic religious texts, soul food (and what collards do to your bowels), the noted and imprisoned activist Mumia Abu-Jamal, diasporic ideation, going to the market, and late nights on the phone...Jilly from Philly...stays keeping it real."


== Film and television ==
On the advice of her good friend, director Ozzie Jones, she began pursuing a career in acting in 2000. She joined a fellowship at a theater company in Philadelphia. Her theater debut was in Tyler Perry's Neighbors from Hell. For two years, she took menial jobs in exchange for acting lessons. In 2004, Scott appeared in several episodes of season four of UPN's Girlfriends, playing Donna, a love interest to main character, William Dent (Reggie Hayes). She also appeared in the Showtime movie Cavedwellers, starring Kevin Bacon and Kyra Sedgwick.Her first feature film appearances occurred in 2007, when Scott appeared in Hounddog (as Big Mama Thornton) and in Tyler Perry's movie, Why Did I Get Married? In 2008, Scott appeared as Precious Ramotswe in Anthony Minghella's film adaption of Alexander McCall Smith's series of books The No. 1 Ladies' Detective Agency playing a detective. Scott then filmed additional episodes for the series in Botswana in late 2008, co-funded by the BBC and HBO, that were broadcast as a seven-part series on BBC1 in March 2009; and on HBO, which debuted March 29, 2009. BBC and HBO are contemplating whether to produce a second round of episodes of the series.In 2010, she provided the voice of Storm of the X-Men on the BET series Black Panther. On March 24, 2010, she guest-starred in an episode of Law & Order: Special Victims Unit. She reprised her role as Sheila in Why Did I Get Married Too? (2010). The movie was shot in August 2009 and received an April 2, 2010 release. That same year, Scott starred in the Lifetime movie Sins of the Mother as Nona, an alcoholic mother confronted by her estranged daughter whom she neglected. At the 42nd NAACP Image Awards, Scott was awarded Outstanding Actress in a Television Movie, Mini-Series or Dramatic Special for her role in Sins of the Mother.In May 2012, Scott appeared on VH1 Storytellers. She performed a few of her most notable songs such as "Golden" and "He Loves Me". With wig as well as costume changes, she created characters to fit each song. Later in 2012 she starred with Queen Latifah, Alfre Woodard, Phylicia Rashad, Adepero Oduye, and Condola Rashad in Steel Magnolias, a remake of the 1989 original for Lifetime. She played Truvy Jones, a role originated by Dolly Parton. In December 2012, Scott appeared in "The Human Kind", the eighth episode of the fifth season of Fringe. She starred with Paula Patton and Derek Luke in Baggage Claim (2013), the film adaptation of playwright David E. Talbert's 2005 novel of the same name. In January 2015 she co-starred with Regina Hall and Eve in the Lifetime movie With this Ring.
Since 2018, Scott's played a recurring role in the CW’s Black Lightning as villain Lady Eve, a ruler of a criminal empire and foe of superhero, Black Lightning.In 2019, Scott starred in First Wives Club, a TV adaptation of the 1996 comedy about three divorced wives who share a common past. The show is available on BET’s streaming service, BET Plus and also stars Ryan Michelle Bathe and Michelle Buteau. The show was renewed for a second season.


== Personal life ==
Scott and long-term boyfriend Lyzel Williams, a graphic artist and DJ, married in 2001 in a private Hawaiian ceremony during a vacation. The couple dated for seven years before they wed. She wrote and recorded the song "He Loves Me (Lyzel in E Flat)" about Williams. After six years of marriage, Scott and Williams divorced in 2007.
Scott has resided in Mount Laurel Township, New Jersey, and California. As of December 2014, she has been living in Tennessee.On June 20, 2008, at a concert in New York's Carnegie Hall, Scott shared a long on-stage kiss with her drummer, Li'l John Roberts; the couple then told the audience that they were engaged. Their son, Jett Hamilton Roberts, was born on April 20, 2009. On June 23, 2009, Scott announced that she and Roberts had broken up, with Scott breaking the news to Essence magazine. Despite the break-up, Scott hopes for both parents to have an active part in their child's upbringing, stating: "We definitely love our son and we are co-parenting and working on being friends. It is what it is. I have a lot of support, so I want for nothing as far as that's concerned."


== Philanthropy ==
In 2003, Scott established the Blues Babe Foundation, a program founded to help young minority students pay for university expenses. The foundation offers financial assistance to students between the ages of 16 and 21 and focuses on students residing in Philadelphia, Camden, and the greater Delaware Valley. She donated US$100,000 to start the foundation. The foundation was named after Scott's grandmother who was known as "Blue Babe".In Spring 2003, the Blues Babe Foundation made a donation of more than $60,000 to the graduating class of the Creative Arts School in Camden. Any student during the ensuing three years who maintained a 3.2 GPA qualified for a stipend toward his or her college education.
At the Essence Music Festival in July 2006, Scott spoke out about how women of color are portrayed in hip-hop songs and music videos. She criticized the content for being "dirty, inappropriate, inadequate, unhealthy, and polluted" urging the listening audience to "demand more" when selecting music.


== Discography ==

Studio albumsWho Is Jill Scott?: Words and Sounds Vol. 1 (2000)
Beautifully Human: Words and Sounds Vol. 2 (2004)
The Real Thing: Words and Sounds Vol. 3 (2007)
The Light of the Sun (2011)
Woman (2015)


== Concert tours ==
Words and Sounds Tour (2001)
Buzz Tour (2004)
Big Beautiful Tour (2005)
Sugar Water Festival Tour (2005)
The Real Thing Tour (2008)
Maxwell & Jill Scott: The Tour (2010)
Summer Block Party (2011–12)
An Evening with Jill Scott (2011–12)
Live in the Moment Tour (2018–19)
Who is Jill Scott 20th Anniversary Tour (2020)


== Filmography ==


=== Film ===


=== Television ===


=== Documentary ===


== Award and nominations ==
List of awards and nominations received by Jill Scott


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website
Jill Scott at IMDb
Jill Scott discography at DiscogsGeorge Spivey (born June 21, 1968), known professionally as DJ Scratch, is an American hip hop DJ and producer from Brooklyn, New York.DJ Scratch is the 1988 New Music Seminar Battle For World Supremacy DJ champion, the 2010 Master of the Mix winner and the 2012, 2013 & 2014 Global Spin Awards' "Turntablist of the Year". 19 albums produced by DJ Scratch were certified Gold in United States, seven of them were certified as Platinum.


== Career ==
DJ Scratch was introduced to EPMD by Jam Master Jay at the Run's House Tour after DJ K LA Boss left EPMD. Impressed by his skills, the two designated DJ Scratch as their official D.J. by their second album Unfinished Business in 1989. His presence was felt with his powerful cutting and scratching techniques that are heard on various tracks. Aside from scratching, on Business As Usual, he produced the track "Funky Piano", "Rampage" and in 1991 worked on a remix for "I'm Mad" off the "Rampage" 12" single.In 1992 Scratch produced "Scratch Bring It Back, Pt. 2 (Mic Doc)" and briefly worked with his cousin DJ Magic Mike after EPMD broke up. Soon Scratch made a name for himself as a producer for Busta Rhymes and the Flipmode Squad off Busta's debut album in 1996. By 2003 DJ Scratch became a well distinguished and revered hip-hop producer after working with 50 Cent, LL Cool J, Talib Kweli, Pharoahe Monch, DMX, The Roots, Q-Tip and other notable acts.Scratch was the resident DJ for three nationally aired TV Shows: Hip Hop Hold Em', Fox 5's Uptown Comedy Club and B.E.T.'s Rap City: The Basement. Scratch's film credits include Juice, The Original 50 Cent, Backstage, Fly By Night, Rhyme & Reason and Spike Lee's film Bamboozled. In addition, Coca-Cola commissioned Scratch to produce & feature in their first DJ commercial, "3 DJs".According to Parish Smith, an EPMD member, DJ Scratch left the group in 2015. Scratch posted on his Instagram page words of resentment towards former participants on January 2, 2017.In 2016, DJ Scratch helped fill in for A Tribe Called Quest's DJ Ali Shaheed Muhammad on their final album We Got It from Here... Thank You 4 Your Service due to Ali producing the soundtrack for the Luke Cage TV series with Adrian Younge at the time.
As of 2022, Scratch hosts The DJ Scratch Show on LL Cool J’s Rock The Bells Radio, which is a station on Sirius XM. It is a mix show that features the DJ curating a selection of classic hip-hop.Scratch calls Grandmaster Flash his mentor.


== Awards and nominations ==
1988 — New Music Seminar Battle For World Supremacy DJ champion
2010 — Master of the Mix winner
2012, 2013 & 2014 — Global Spin Awards' "Turntablist Of The Year"DJ Scratch-produced works nominated for a Grammy award
Busta Rhymes — song "Gimme Some More" (1998) ("Best Rap Solo Performance")
Busta Rhymes — album E.L.E. (Extinction Level Event): The Final World Front (1998) ("Best Rap Album")
The Roots — album Phrenology (2002) ("Best Rap Album")Albums, produced by DJ Scratch, which were certified Gold in United States
EPMD — Unfinished Business (1989)
EPMD — Business As Usual (1990)
EPMD — Business Never Personal (1992)
EPMD — Back in Business (1997)
Flipmode Squad — The Imperial (1998)
Q-Tip — Amplified (1999)
Funkmaster Flex & Big Kap — The Tunnel (1999)
LL Cool J — G.O.A.T. (2000)
Busta Rhymes — It Ain't Safe No More... (2002)
The Roots — Phrenology (2002)
Talib Kweli — Quality (2002)Albums, produced by DJ Scratch, which were certified Platinum in United States
Busta Rhymes — The Coming (1996)
Busta Rhymes — When Disaster Strikes (1997)
Busta Rhymes — E.L.E. (Extinction Level Event): The Final World Front (1998)
DJ Clue — The Professional (1998)
Method Man & Redman — Blackout! (1999)
Busta Rhymes — Anarchy (2000)
DMX — Grand Champ (2003)


== Discography ==


== References ==


== External links ==
 Media related to DJ Scratch at Wikimedia Commons
DJ Scratch discography at Discogs
George Spivey discography at Discogs
DJ Scratch at IMDb
DJ Scratch at Rapgenius
Official website DJ Scratch
DJ Scratch Interview at NAMM Oral History Collection (June 19, 2017)Sensational (born Colin Julius Bobb; October 18, 1974, in Guyana) is a hip-hop performer from New York.


== Biography ==
According to the film The Rise and Fall and Rise of Sensational he got into music at a young age, including reggae and calypso. He was later led to hip-hop and was known to rap over Stockhausen records. According to the film, Sensational is the nephew of Edgar Rose, who played on a popular calypso song called "Labour Day." In the mid-90s he made his debut working with the Jungle Brothers under the name Torture, and appeared on the single "Troopin' On The Downlow." He was later heavily featured on the unreleased Jungle Brothers album Crazy Wisdom Masters in 1993 (produced by Bill Laswell) but this was shelved by Warner Bros, due to having been too "experimental." After taking time out from music-related activity, in 1997 he signed to Spectre's label Wordsound, changed his name to Sensational and released his debut album Loaded With Power.
His style is considered unique and different.  On his debut he was forced to use his headphone cans as a makeshift microphone, and used sounds from old analogue equipment and found sounds which were recorded and then looped. His style is often about weed intake or sci-fi based themes. He is known more for his often eclectic collaboration work, having played with the likes of Hip Hop belgian producer R.E.D.A., Cardopusher, Kid 606, Handsome Boy Modeling School, DJ Scotch Bonnet, Kouhei Matsunaga, and Spectre. Often quite prolific, but known for brief spells of homelessness, it is not known how much of Sensational's discography there actually is, as he can often be found selling his music on the streets of New York.


== Discography ==
Loaded With Power (1997)
Corner The Market (1999)
Heavyweighter (2000)
Get on My Page (2001)
Spectre Featuring Sensational – Parts Unknown (2002)
Natural Shine (2002)
Mix Hits on a Fritz (2003)
Crown Material (2005)
Speaks For Itself (2005)
Sensational Meets Kouhei (2006)
Sensational, Göldin & Bit-Tuner – It's Sensational (2008)
Sensational & Spectre – Acid & Bass (2009)
Sensational Meets Koyxeи – Sensational Meets Koyxeи  (2010)
Sensational & Ciroyelle – Connected Spirits (2019)


== External links ==
Literature by and about Sensational (musician) in the German National Library catalogue


== References ==
this article incorporates information the documentary Rise and Fall and Rise of Sensational.William Reyna (born 1984), better known by his stage name Sensato del Patio or simply Sensato, is a Dominican rapper from New York City. He is perhaps best known for collaborating with fellow Caribbean musicians such as Pitbull, Fuego, Black Point and Mozart La Para. He first gained major recognition in 2010, when he released the single "Watagatapitusberry" featuring Black Point and Pitbull.


== Career ==
Sensato's first album, We Ain't Even Supposed 2 B Here, includes 14 songs, 5 of which were released as singles. "Booty Booty", the first single, features vocals from Cuban-American rapper Pitbull. "Loca People", his second single, features Pitbull and Sak Noel. "Plata O Plomo", his third single, features Jiggy Drama and Dominican-American merengue singer Fuego. "Is This Love" was the fourth single and features Papayo and Dynasty. The fifth single, "Ponte Sensato", features Los Gambinos. In August 2013, Sensato released "Remember", his first bachata single, which features Pitbull. Also in August 2013, Sensato released his first salsa single, featuring Los Gambinos, titled "Ponte Sensato".


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===
We Ain't Even Supposed 2 B Here (2013)
Probando (2014)
Grandes Exitos
La Gran Manzana


=== Mixtapes ===
El 28 The Mixtape (2011)
El 28 The Mixtape Parte 2 (2012)
La Parte 3 Del 28 (2014)
SenCity (2015)
Me Dieron De Alta


=== Singles ===
"Romo Romo" (2010)
"Golpe De Estado" (2011)
"Back In Business" (2012)
"Party" (featuring Sak Noel) (2012)
"La Confesion" (featuring Pitbull) (2013)
"Booty Booty" (featuring Pitbull) (2013)
"Ponte Sensato" (featuring Los Gambinos) (2013)
"Remember" (featuring Pitbull) (2013)
"Is This Love" (featuring Papayo & Dynasty) (2013)
"Plata O Plomo" (featuring Fuego & Jiggy Drama) (2013)
"Guacamole" (with 8ky 6lu) (2016)
"Figure It Out" (with 8ky 6lu) (2016)
"Gloria A Dios"
"Que Vivan Lo Tiger"
"Tu No Lo Sabe"
"El Mario De Tu Mujer"
"No Me Niegue"
"Chapiadora"
"Bello"
"Back In Business"
"Racheta"


=== Featured singles ===
"Watagatapitusberry – (featuring Pitbull, Black Point, El Cata & Lil Jon) (2010)
"Que Buena Tu Ta (DR Remix)" – Fuego (featuring Sensato Del Patio, Black Point, Mozart La Para, Los Pepes, Monkey Black & Villanosam) (2010)
"El Taxi" – Pitbull (Feat. Sensato Del Patio) (2011)
"Crazy People" – Pitbull (Feat. Sensato & Sak Noel) (2012)
"Global Warming" – Pitbull (Feat. Sensato) (2012)
"Salud" – Sky Blu (Feat. Sensato, Wilmer Valderrama & Reek Rude) (2013)


=== Guest appearances ===
"El Sapito" – Villanosam &Mozart La Para (Feat. Sensato Del Patio) (2010)


=== Awards and nominations ===
Latin Grammy Award – Best Urban Song: "Crazy People" – Nomination
Billboard Latin Music Award – Digital Song: "El Taxi" – Nomination


== References ==


== External links ==
Official websiteErick Sermon (born November 25, 1968) is an American rapper and producer. He is best known as one-third—alongside PMD & DJ Scratch—of 1980s/1990s hip hop group EPMD and for his production work.


== Career ==
Sermon started professionally in 1986 as a producer and artist of the hip hop group EPMD. He began recording solo albums for Def Jam in 1993; in 1997, he rejoined EPMD. The following year, Sermon, Murray and Redman recorded a cover version of "Rapper's Delight" by the Sugarhill Gang. EPMD disbanded a second time in 1999.
In 2000, Sermon moved over to J Records, and released the album Music the following year. The album's first single, "Music", featured guest vocals from Marvin Gaye, which Sermon reportedly culled from unreleased recordings found in a small record shop in London. "Music" went on to become Sermon's highest-charting song, peaking at number 22 on the Billboard Hot 100 and number 2 on the R&B chart. Sermon's second album on J Records, React, was released in 2002. React's title track peaked at number 36 on the Billboard Hot 100, but the album sold poorly and Sermon was dropped from the label in 2003. In a June 30, 2004 interview with HipHopDX.com, Sermon told music journalist Bayer Mack, "Things weren't right at J Records. Clive Davis and them don't believe in promotion. When Puffy had Bad Boy at Arista, it was him doing all the [promotional] work." He also stated Busta Rhymes and Wyclef Jean had similar issues with J Records.Sermon went on to establish his Def Squad imprint with Universal Records and released his sixth solo album, Chilltown, New York, in 2004. The album was powered by the single "Feel It" (which contained a sample of reggae/R&B singer Sean Paul), a song which became a success in the United States.
In an interview, he stated that he was going to step aside and try to get upcoming artists in the spotlight. However, Sermon has not stopped in the music industry, as he produced the song "Goldmine" on Busta Rhymes' album, The Big Bang in 2006. Soon after, Sermon has recorded "Don't Make No Sense" with Def Squad. He also collaborated with Redman and produced a few songs on the album Red Gone Wild while also making an appearance with Def Squad member Keith Murray.
In early 2008, Sermon and Smith started their own record label called EP Records, distributed by RBS/Universal Music Group. The seventh EPMD album, We Mean Business, came out in December 2008.
Sermon was featured in the final episode of Yo! MTV Raps in a freestyle session featuring artists such as Rakim, KRS-One, Chubb Rock, MC Serch and Craig Mack.
In 2018, Sermon teamed up with Lost Boyz' own Mr Cheeks & broadcaster Ryan Verneuille to become the executive producer on their FM radio program, "The Ryan Show".
Sermon is part of Tracklib's Creators Advisory Board.


== Personal life ==
On September 25, 2001, Sermon was injured when he fell from the third floor of an apartment building. Police claimed Sermon attempted suicide, however he later denied and claimed it was accidental.On November 12, 2011, he suffered a heart attack from which he recovered.


== Discography ==

Studio albumsNo Pressure (1993)
Double or Nothing (1995)
Erick Onasis (2000)
Music (2001)
React (2002)
Chilltown, New York (2004)
E.S.P. (Erick Sermon's Perception) (2015)
Vernia (2019)Collaboration albumsEl Niño with Def Squad (1998)


== Video games ==
Def Jam Fight For NY (2004) as Himself
Def Jam Fight for NY: The Takeover (2006) as Himself


== References ==


== External links ==

Erick Sermon at AllMusic 
Erick Sermon at IMDbMichael Jean Clervoix (born February 11, 1976), professionally known as Sha Money XL, is an American DJ, songwriter, record producer, and music manager from New York City.


== Career ==
Clervoix was a producer for 50 Cent and the founder of Teamwork Music Inc. After Interscope granted 50 Cent his own label in 2003, Sha Money XL was president of G-Unit Records until 2007. He then was VP of A&R at Def Jam in May 2010, and produced Big K.R.I.T.'s Live from the Underground. As of 2015 he is an executive at Epic Records.


== Production discography ==


=== 1997 ===
Royal Flush - Ghetto Millionaire08. "Conflict" (featuring Wastlanz)


=== 1999 ===
Brixx - Everything Happens for a Reason07. "Can't Outplay Us"


=== 2000 ===
Half a Mill - Milíon12. "Ghetto Girl"50 Cent - Power of the Dollar15. "You Ain't No Gangsta"


=== 2001 ===
Tragedy Khadafi - Against All Odds03. "Crime Nationalists" (featuring Headrush Napoleon & Tasha Holiday)
06. "Bing Monsters" (featuring Ja Rule & Headrush Napoleon)
11. "Say Goodbye" (featuring Killah Shah & Dave Bing)Beanie Sigel - The Reason11. "Tales of a Hustler" (featuring Omillio Sparks)Cormega - The Realness10. "Get Out My Way"


=== 2002 ===
50 Cent - Guess Who's Back?06. "50 Bars"G-Unit - 50 Cent Is the Future16. "Bad News"G-Unit - No Mercy, No FearG-Unit - God's Plan


=== 2003 ===
Lil' Kim - La Bella Mafia12. "Magic Stick" (featuring 50 Cent) (produced with Fantom of the Beat)50 Cent - Get Rich or Die Tryin'06. "High All the Time" (produced with DJ Rad and Eminem)
13. "Poor Lil' Rich" (produced with Eminem)Tragedy Khadafi - Still Reportin'...08. "Walk wit Me (911")G-Unit - Beg for Mercy14. "Beg for Mercy" (produced with Big-Toni)Juvenile - Juve the Great13. "Juve the Great" (produced with Black Jeruz)


=== 2004 ===
Lloyd Banks - "The Hunger for More"08. "If You So Gangsta" (produced with Chad Beatz)
11. "When the Chips Are Down" (produced with Black Jeruz)Young Buck - "Straight Outta Cashville"02. "Do It Like Me" (produced with Chad Beatz)
15. "DPG-Unit" (featuring 50 Cent, Daz Dillinger, Lloyd Banks, Snoop Dogg & Soopafly) (produced with Black Jeruz) (United Kingdom and Japan Bonus Track)Snoop Dogg - "R&G (Rhythm & Gangsta): The Masterpiece"07. "Snoop D.O. Double G" (produced with Black Jeruz)
14. "Oh No" (featuring 50 Cent) (produced with Ron Browz)


=== 2005 ===
Cormega - The Testament05. "Angel Dust"50 Cent - The Massacre03. "This is 50" (produced with Black Jeruz)Junior M.A.F.I.A. - Riot Musik14. "Do da Damm Thing" (featuring Aja)Slim Thug - Already Platinum11. "The Interview" (produced with Black Jeruz)Tony Yayo - Thoughts of a Predicate Felon04. "Tattle Teller" (produced with Black Jeruz)Various Artists - Get Rich or Die Tryin'03. "Things Change" (featuring Spider Loc, 50 Cent & Lloyd Banks) (produced with Black Jeruz)
13. "You a Shooter" (featuring Mobb Deep & 50 Cent)


=== 2006 ===
Mobb Deep - Blood Money02. "Put 'Em In Their Place" (produced with Havoc & Ky Miller)Lloyd Banks - Rotten Apple01. "Rotten Apple" (featuring 50 Cent & Prodigy) (produced with Havoc)
07. "Help" (featuring Keri Hilson) (produced with Ron Browz)
17. "Life" (featuring Spider Loc) (produced with Chad Beatz) (United Kingdom Bonus Track)Lil Scrappy - Bred 2 Die - Born 2 Live13. "Baby Daddy" (produced with Ky Miller)


=== 2007 ===
50 Cent - Bulletproof01. "Maybe We Crazy"
02. "When You Hear That" (featuring Tony Yayo)
03. "I'm a Rider"
04. "Simply the Best"
05. "Pimpin', Part 2"
06. "Not Rich, Still Lyin' (The Game Diss)"
07. "Why They Look Like That"
08. "Come and Get You"
09. "I Warned You"
10. "I Run NY" (featuring Tony Yayo)
11. "Grew Up"
12. "South Side"
13. "Why Ask Why"
14. "Hit You Ass Up" (featuring Tony Yayo and Lloyd Banks)
15. "G-Unit Radio" (featuring DJ Whoo Kid)
16. "Window Shopper (Remix)" (featuring Mase)
17. "Movie Trailer"
18. "Best Friend (Remix)" (featuring Olivia)Gorilla Zoe - Welcome to the Zoo15. "Last Time I Checked" (produced with Canei Finch)


=== 2008 ===
Scarface - Emeritus

12. "Unexpected" (featuring Wacko) (produced with Young Cee)


=== 2009 ===


=== 2010 ===
Stat Quo - Statlanta03. "Ghetto USA" (featuring Antonio McLendon)


=== 2011 ===
Cashis - From The Vault19. "Grinden"


=== 2012 ===


=== 2013 ===


=== 2014 ===
Bobby Shmurda - Shmurda She Wrote05. "Wipe The Case Away" (featuring Ty Real)


=== 2015 ===
Mac Miller - GO:OD AM05. "100 Grandkids" (produced with ID Labs)


=== 2016 ===
Domo Genesis - Genesis02. "One Below" (produced with G Koop)


== Personal life ==
Clervoix who is of Haitian descent, joined in on the relief efforts a year later in the aftermath of the 2010 Haiti earthquake that still left many people impoverished and homeless sending over money, food and clothes to Port-au-Prince, as well as his mother’s hometown of Limbé. He sought to create a Haitian hip-hop EP in collaboration with Creole Haitian rap stars such as Seca Konsa and among others.He is cousins with DJ Whoo Kid.


== References ==Jonathan Miles Shecter (born August 4, 1968), an American magazine editor and music promoter, is also known as "Shecky Green" and "J the Sultan." He is the co-founder of the music and culture magazine The Source, former Director of Programming for the Wynn Las Vegas, and current Editor-In-Chief for Cuepoint at Medium.


== Early life ==
Shecter was born in Philadelphia and grew up in a Jewish family. He is a member of the Class of 1986 of Friends Select School, a college-preparatory, Quaker school for pre-kindergarten through 12th grade in Philadelphia. In 1986, he enrolled in Harvard College as an English major and graduated in 1990. During his 1988 sophomore year, he began overseeing a rap music radio show called Street Beat on Harvard College’s radio station, WHRB 95.3 FM, with his then roommate David M. Mays, To promote this radio show Shecter started The Source magazine as a newsletter, using an issue for his senior thesis, The Decade of Hip Hop.With high-school friend Kevin "Kevi-Kev" Krakower, he co-founded a rap group named Big Man on Campus. and they and produced their first single that same year.


== Career ==


=== The Source ===
Shecter co-founded The Source magazine in 1988 in Cambridge, MA with his roommate David Mays initially as an effort to promote his rap music radio show on WHRB 95.3 FM.Often cited as “The Bible of Hip Hop,” the magazine devoted coverage to the rising rap and hip-hop music genres.Shecter served as editor-in-chief of The Source, while Mays handled publishing duties.The magazine's officers relocated to New York City in 1990 with the intention to expand the magazine into a mainstream market publication;-->Shecter brought on additional staff. Mays secured the magazine's first newsstand distribution agreement, and publication's distribution increased. Funding was via selling ad space, including to rap performer Christopher Wallace, also known as Notorious B.I.G. and performer/producer Sean John Combs.
Shecter left The Source magazine in 1995, which by then was recognized by Audit Bureau of Circulation..


=== Wynn (Las Vegas) Hotel: Entertainment director ===
In 2003 Shecter relocated from New York City to Las Vegas. where he was recognized as a dance music promoter and DJ representative.Shecter partnered with Ultra Music to create compilation albums for the Wynn's nightclubs Surrender, Encore Beach Club, and Andrea's Restaurant. These albums were sold through retail outlets inside the Wynn Las Vegas. He was instrumental in the development of a recording studio for the nightclub's resident DJs in late 2013.


=== Entrepreneur ===
Shecter had launched a number of companies after his departure from The Source magazine in 1995. and was also involved in the promotion of rapper Marshall Bruce Mathers III, also known as Eminem, early in his career.


== Personal ==
Shecter has a sister, a half-brother, a son, and a niece and nephew.


== References ==Michael Kyle Williams (born September 23, 1998), known professionally as Sheff G, is an American rapper from Flatbush, Brooklyn, New York. He rose to fame with his single "No Suburban" in 2017 which was a response to the song "Suburban" by 22Gz. Williams is widely known as one of the vanguards of the Brooklyn drill movement. On May 16, 2023, Williams was indicted with 31 other purported gang members responsible for several shooting incidents and at least one murder over a two-year span.


== Early life ==
Michael Williams was born on September 23, 1998, in Brooklyn, New York, to a Trinidadian mother and Haitian father. He was raised in the Flatbush section of Brooklyn. He was influenced and inspired to rap by listening to B.I.G. and Chicago drill rappers like Lil Bibby and Chief Keef.Before getting into music, Sheff G joined the 83 (Eight Trey) Gangsta Crips at age 12, and was imprisoned for 2 years for a felony gun charge. In 2015, he went back to prison for robbery for two years. Williams was released from prison in 2017. When asked about his childhood before rap, Williams said: "Growing up, all I was around was violence, in school, or hanging with my niggas, it was rough in the streets. I had to be protected out there, so I rolled with the 83s, we was in Flatbush especially on my block, I was a block baby you heard like niggas kno my body. I would never think rapping would be n my future. I remember in 2014, at 15, we was [sic] growing up watching GS9 the G-Stone Crips get big, and they from the 90s on the East side, and I would be like 'damn, imagine I'm like that.' But it was a dream then."


== Music career ==
Williams was influenced by Chicago Drill rappers Chief Keef, Lil Bibby and G Herbo. In 2017, his single "No Suburban (produced by AXL Beats)" went viral and he was credited as one of the pioneers of the Brooklyn drill music movement. He made a remix of "No Suburban" with GS9 affiliate rapper Corey Finesse.Sheff G, Sleepy Hallow and Corey Finesse were previously managed by former NFL football player, Junior Galette’s NuLa Entertainment.In 2019, he released his mixtape called The Unluccy Luccy Kid. His label Winners Circle Entertainment was founded in the same year.In May 2020, he released his debut studio album called One and Only. His single "No Suburban, Pt. 2" went viral with over 21 million streams. It was later certified Gold by RIAA in 2022.On July 17, 2020, he releases his EP Just 4 Yall, composed by 5 songs which includes songs "Picasso" feat Chicago drill rapper King Von, Jay Critch and Eli Fross; "Say That" ft Rich The Kid; and "Make It Happen" ft Sleepy Hallow.In August 2020, Winners Circle Entertainment began a partnership with RCA Records. Sheff G and Sleepy Hallow released the single "Tip Toe" produced by Great John, using a sample of Tiny Tim's version of "Tiptoe Through the Tulips". It was the second Sheff G single to be certified Gold by RIAA.On December 16, 2020, he released the mixtape Proud Of Me Now. Throughout 2021, a multitude of singles would release including "On Go" featuring Polo G in July and "Run It Up" featuring Sleepy Hallow and A Boogie Wit da Hoodie in August.On July 14, 2022, he released his album called From the Can. It contained 12 songs with features from Sleepy Hallow, A Boogie Wit da Hoodie, Polo G, Fivio Foreign, Rowdy Rebel, and JAY-Bezzy.


== Legal controversy ==
In high school, Williams was arrested and went on probation after firing gunshots at Brooklyn’s Kings Plaza.
One week before he turned 16, in 2014, he was arrested for the first time and booked in for fighting.
On November 19, 2015, Williams was incarcerated for one year and four months in jail for a felony gun charge and robbery. Williams also stated the last time he was incarcerated was in October 2017 to January 2018, a brief stint which he explains was the reason for his break on music.
On July 15, 2021, Williams was arrested in New York City, New York for second-degree gun possession. His bail was remanded, meaning he sat behind bars until his court hearing on August 18, 2021. He pleaded guilty on October 20, 2021, and was sentenced to two years in prison. He is currently serving his sentence at Bare Hill Correctional Facility.


== References ==Ackquille Jean Pollard (born August 4, 1994), known professionally as Bobby Shmurda, is an American rapper. Along with Rowdy Rebel, Shmurda is considered a pioneer of Brooklyn drill music. He rose to international fame in 2014 when his song "Hot Nigga" peaked at number six on the Billboard Hot 100.  The success of the single led to Shmurda signing a deal with Epic Records. His debut EP, Shmurda She Wrote, was released in November 2014.
In December 2014, New York City Police arrested Shmurda and charged him, along with several other members of GS9, with conspiracy to murder, weapons possession, and reckless endangerment. In 2016, he pleaded guilty and was sentenced to seven years in prison, which was reduced to five years after receiving credit for the two years he already served awaiting trial. After over six years in prison, Shmurda was released from Clinton Correctional Facility in February 2021. His release was widely celebrated across the hip-hop community.


== Early life ==
Ackquille Pollard was born in Miami, Florida. His mother is African-American and his father is Jamaican.  His mother moved to East Flatbush from Florida after his father's incarceration.
Pollard had run-ins with the law while living in Brooklyn, including fifteen months spent in detention for probation violation and being arrested on gun charges that were later dropped. According to his 2014 indictment, Pollard was the ringleader of a criminal enterprise called "GS9" that regularly entered into disputes with criminal gangs, was responsible for murders and non-fatal shootings, and engaged in drug trafficking along Kings Highway to East Flatbush.


== Career ==
The first song that he remixed was Crime Mob's "Knuck If You Buck"; however, he did not receive any  attention until 2014, with the release of his song "Hot Nigga". The song uses the instrumental from Lloyd Banks' 2012 song "Jackpot". The song and its accompanying music video went viral shortly after being uploaded to YouTube in the spring of 2014. Shmurda's signature "Shmoney dance", which he performs in the video, soon became an internet meme and was featured in numerous popular Vines from the latter half of 2014; it was also replicated by Beyoncé and Jay-Z during their On the Run Tour and by Canadian rapper Drake while hosting the 2014 ESPY Awards, among other celebrities. Freestyles over the instrumental were made by a number of rappers after its release, including Juicy J, French Montana, Lil' Kim, Gunplay, and T.I. Following the song's viral success, Shmurda was signed to Epic Records, and the song was officially released as his debut single under Epic. The song topped the Hot R&B/Hip-Hop songs chart, and peaked at number 6 on the Billboard Hot 100, eventually being certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America. The music video received over 649 million views on YouTube as of July 2020. The song's official remix—featuring guest vocals from Fabolous, Chris Brown, Jadakiss, Rowdy Rebel, Busta Rhymes, and Yo Gotti—was released on September 4, 2014. A reggae remix of the song was also released in August 2014 that featured Junior Reid, Mavado, Popcaan, and Jah X. Shmurda also became known for his song "Bobby Bitch" which peaked at number 92 on the Billboard Hot 100. His debut EP, Shmurda She Wrote, was released on November 10, 2014.
Shmurda's debut studio album with Epic Records was scheduled for release in 2016 and was going to be produced by Jahlil Beats. It was postponed, however, due to his imprisonment. In February 2017, Shmurda freestyled for rapper Meek Mill and claimed that he was still writing music while in prison. The following year, Shmurda featured on fellow rapper 6ix9ine's single "Stoopid", phoning in his verses over the prison telephone. The single peaked at number 25 on the Billboard Hot 100.
Shmurda made his first concert performance appearance since being released from prison at Rolling Loud Festival in Miami, Florida on Friday, July 23, 2021.On September 3, 2021, Shmurda released his first single since his release from jail, "No Time for Sleep (Freestyle)". On March 27, 2022, after years of conflict with Epic Records, Bobby Shmurda's request for release was approved and finalized.


== Criminal conviction ==
On June 3, 2014, Shmurda was arrested and charged with felony criminal possession of a weapon. Police say they saw him flashing the gun in an apartment, and when they went to investigate he tried to hide it in a couch. He was set free on US$10,000 bail. On December 17, 2014, police arrested Shmurda and charged him with conspiracy, reckless endangerment, and drug and gun possession; charges against the others included murder, attempted murder, assault, and drug dealing.  Shmurda pleaded not guilty and was held on $2 million bail. Police said they had been investigating the gang for murder and shooting indiscriminately at crowds in public places long before Shmurda rose to fame. Police said Shmurda was "the driving force" in a gang also known as GS9 (standing for "Grimey Shooters," "Gun Squad" or "G Stone Crips."), the name of his label, as they dealt crack cocaine and waged deadly battles with rival gangs for territory. He faced a maximum sentence of 8–25 years.James Essig, head of the NYPD unit that made the arrests, said Shmurda's songs and videos were "almost like a real-life document of what they were doing on the street." In his song "Hot Nigga", Shmurda rapped that "I been selling crack since like the fifth grade" because "Jaja taught me"; Shmurda also rapped about his crew's past and future murders. Shmurda has asserted that the lyrics represent his real life in several interviews, though the Supreme Court of New Jersey recently ruled that lyrics cannot be read at trial as evidence unless they have a "strong nexus" to a specific crime. During his jail time, Shmurda was involved in a fight suspected to be related to the Bloods vs. Crips rivalry.Between late June and early July 2015, the rapper and his ex-girlfriend were caught by officials after smuggling a knife into Rikers Island jail. Both were charged with two counts of promoting contraband, in addition to one count of criminal possession of a weapon in the fourth degree, which could result in an additional seven-year sentence. Shmurda appeared in the Bronx Supreme Court to face his charges of prison contraband plus 25 years for his previous charge in late 2014. He and his ex-girlfriend pleaded not guilty to the contraband charge, but Shmurda was still facing a maximum sentence of 25 years for the drug and gun charges.


=== Conviction ===
On September 9, 2016, as part of a plea deal, Shmurda pleaded guilty to one count of third-degree conspiracy and one count of weapons possession, and was sentenced to seven years in prison. Under the deal, Shmurda could not appeal the sentence, but was to be given credit for two years served, leaving five years left on his sentence, followed by five years of probation. His lawyer, Alex Spiro, expected that with good behavior Shmurda would only serve approximately three and a half years. In early 2017, Shmurda was given a four-year sentence for sneaking a makeshift knife (shiv) into his cell. The sentence was to run concurrently to his ongoing seven-year sentence, so that he would not face any additional prison time.


=== Incarceration ===
Shmurda was first imprisoned in Rikers Island. He was involved in numerous incidents while incarcerated. In May 2015, Shmurda took part in a brawl that included members from the Bloods and Crips street gangs. In November 2016, Shmurda was involved in a brawl between several inmates that led to him losing phone privileges for an unnamed period of time and being subject to solitary confinement for a month. In 2017, he was moved to Clinton Correctional Facility in upstate New York, to finish his sentence in protective custody.Images of Shmurda while incarcerated surfaced online after three years served of the five-year sentence.


=== Release ===
A hearing in the week of August 18, 2020 denied Shmurda parole.Shmurda's conditional release date was set to December 11, 2020, after serving his full sentence, by his parole board. However, after a review by the Department of Corrections, Shmurda's credit for good institutional behavior was restored, qualifying him for conditional release on February 23, 2021, with the rest of his sentence to be served on parole.Shmurda was released on February 23, 2021 under supervision by fellow community members in Kings County, New York. He will be under parole until the end of his full sentence on February 23, 2026. Rapper Quavo picked up Shmurda from prison on February 23, 2021, after stating in an interview with Billboard that he was "...personally (gonna go) pick up Bobby Shmurda."


== Discography ==


=== Mixtapes ===


=== Extended plays ===


=== Singles ===


==== As lead artist ====


==== As featured artist ====


=== Guest appearances ===


== Notes ==


== References ==Gregory Edward Jacobs (August 25, 1963 – April 22, 2021), known professionally as  Shock G and by his alter ego Humpty Hump, was an American rapper and musician who was best known as the lead vocalist of the hip hop group Digital Underground. He was responsible for Digital Underground's "The Humpty Dance", 2Pac's breakthrough single "I Get Around", and co-producer of 2Pac's debut album 2Pacalypse Now.


== Early life ==
Gregory Edward Jacobs was born on August 25, 1963, in New York City. He spent most of his childhood moving around the East Coast with his family, eventually settling in Tampa, Florida. As a drummer he won the 1978 "Most Talented" trophy at Greco Junior High School, but after relocating to Queens, New York (as a result of his parents' divorce), he traded his drums in for a set of turntables upon discovering and marvelling over hip hop while the art form was still in an underground developmental stage. He was mentored in the craft by his cousin Rene Negron (a.k.a. DJ-Stretch), and their close friend Shawn Trone (a.k.a. MC Shah-T of the parody-rap group No Face) who suggested Greg use the name "Shah-G". Jacobs liked the idea, but mistakenly thought his friend said "Shock-G", and began using that name instead.
After returning to Tampa less than two years later, he dropped out of Chamberlain High School to form the Master Blasters, a mobile DJ crew which featured three DJs and four emcees at its height. They performed at parties, and also for the crowds at Riverfront Park's outdoor Sunday gatherings, eventually capturing the interest of Tony Stone, a program director at WTMP radio, which was the city's primary R&B station. Tony offered Jacobs, who was sixteen at the time, a job DJing on the air, and for a short while, as "Gregory Racker", he was the youngest radio personality in central Florida with a regular time slot.
After being fired for playing the fifteen-minute-long album version of "(Not Just) Knee Deep" by Funkadelic in a five-minute time slot, and also after tensions with his father escalated, Jacobs found himself backpacking the United States for a few years, drifting through odd jobs and petty criminal adventures. It was during this excursion that his focus switched from DJing to keyboard playing, and while utilizing piano practice-rooms at music stores and colleges around the country, he effectively taught himself to play the piano.
Deciding to pursue music seriously, he returned home, quickly obtained a diploma, and began attending Hillsborough Community College, where he studied music theory under Jim Burge and piano under Patricia J. Trice. It was there at HCC that he met and formed a bond with Kenneth Waters, and the two began performing together under various names including The Chill Factor, and also The Four Horsemen, which included MC Skoobie-D, and the MD Dazzlin Doc-P who had recently moved to Tampa from the Bronx, hip hop's birthplace. Then in 1985, after two years of producing local artists for hire, playing solo piano gigs around town, performing with Kenny, and being a keyboardist in Warren Allen Brooks' band, Greg and his aspiring-actress girlfriend (Davita Watts) set their sights beyond Tampa, and eloped to Los Angeles in search of greater opportunity. There he played keyboards in Kenny McCloud's pop-funk band Onyx before leaving Los Angeles and finally arriving in the San Francisco Bay Area where he found work in an Oakland music store, and where his group Digital Underground would form a few years later.


== Career ==


=== Digital Underground ===
Soon after relocating to Oakland, California, Shock G formed Digital Underground along with Chopmaster J, and the late Kenneth Waters (a.k.a. Kenny-K). After around 15 months of unsuccessful negotiations with various small record companies, in 1988 the trio finally released a 12-inch single on Macola Records. It featured "Your Life's a Cartoon" as the A-side and "Underwater Rimes" as the B-side. Both songs were penned, produced, and performed by Jacobs, who also sketched the cartoonish cover illustrations. The record included the logo for Digital Underground's startup label, TNT, as well as Macola's logo. TNT was also founded by Tupac Shakur's management CEO Atron Gregory. In 1989, the group signed with Tommy Boy Records and released "Doowutchyalike", receiving minimal radio airplay but became an underground hit. Its video was more successful, reaching number 40 on the MTV's top 100 videos of the year. "Doowutchyalike" paved the way for Digital Underground's debut album Sex Packets and the highest-charting song of their career "The Humpty Dance" both released in early 1990, and both achieving platinum sales certifications by the RIAA. The latter was rapped by "Humpty Hump," the most flamboyant of Shock G's several alter egos. By that time, Digital Underground had expanded significantly, with DJ Fuze, Money-B, and Schmoovy-Schmoov joining the group, and with Ramone "Pee Wee" Gooden and Tupac Shakur joining by 1991.


=== Other identities ===
Jacobs performed under many aliases he developed over his career, resulting in characters that were maintained with such reality that they were believed to be separate people by both fans and industry insiders. While he rapped in his normal voice as Shock G, as "Humpty Hump" he adopted a more nasal sound as part of this character's exaggerated buffoon persona that included garish clothes and Groucho glasses. A fictional biography was included in Digital Underground's press kit stating that Humpty Hump's real name was Edward Ellington Humphrey III and he wore the Groucho glasses after burning his nose in a deep-fryer accident. Jacobs made public appearances as one person or the other, but at live shows and video shoots he would use a stand-in or camera tricks to maintain the illusion. Jacobs also sometimes performed as other characters including MC Blowfish, Icey-Mike, The Computer Woman, ButtaFly, and Peanut Hakeem.


=== Television and film work ===
Shock G's TV appearances include Showtime at the Apollo in 1992, several The Arsenio Hall Show performances between 1990 and 1994, and several live MTV performances, including MTV Spring Break 1990 in Daytona Beach, Yo MTV Raps (performing live with Ed Lover and Doctor Dré) in 1991, Club MTV Live (with Downtown Julie Brown) in 1992, and MTV Jams in 1994. Most of these consisted of music performances with either Digital Underground or 2Pac; however, on an episode of the 1991 sitcom Drexell's Class, Jacobs played a small acting role as a furnace repairman. Within the show's story, the title character, Otis Drexell, insists that the furnace repairman looks exactly like Humpty Hump, but neither he nor his coworker (Jason Priestley) have heard of any such hip-hop artist, especially not one with such a ridiculous name. The episode ends with a live performance of Digital Underground's "No Nose Job" on a cruise ship full of Sports Illustrated swimsuit models, which is presented as a scene from one of Mr. Drexell's dreams.With his Digital Underground band members, Jacobs appeared in the Dan Aykroyd-directed comedy film Nothing but Trouble (1991) appearing as both Shock G and Humpty Hump. The group (including Tupac Shakur) makes a cameo music performance, as well as play a small character role in the film as themselves. Since then, Jacobs has appeared in a handful of music documentaries, including Thug Angel: Life of an Outlaw (2000) about Tupac Shakur, and Parliament Funkadelic: One Nation Under a Groove (1996) about George Clinton & P-Funk, both of which received heavy TV rotation, and both of which relied heavily on Jacobs' commentary.
On June 24, 2011, Shock G was featured on an episode of the podcast "You Had To Be There" with comedians Nikki Glaser and Sara Schaefer.


=== Albums ===
Fear of a Mixed Planet (2004 33rd Street Records)
Fear of a Mixed Planet; Bonus Edition (2008 Jake Records)
with Digital Underground: 


=== Production, solo work, and miscellaneous ===
In addition to his work with Digital Underground, Shock G found moderate success as a solo artist and music producer. In 1993, Shock G produced Tupac Shakur's breakthrough platinum single "I Get Around" as well as guest starred on the single and music video, and went on to produce Tupac's "So Many Tears" from his multi-platinum 1995 album Me Against the World. Tupac's first published work was while still a member of Digital Underground when he appeared on the 1991 song and video "Same Song", which also appeared in the Chevy Chase, Dan Aykroyd and Demi Moore film Nothing but Trouble. Shock co-produced Tupac's debut album 2Pacalypse Now. Shock G appeared as a producer and guest artist on fellow Oakland-based rap group The Luniz platinum debut release Operation Stackola in 1995, also appearing as a guest emcee in the "I Got 5 on It (Bay Ballas Remix)" and video.
In 1996 the Wayans brothers' film Don't Be a Menace to South Central While Drinking Your Juice in the Hood featured the Shock G song "We Got More". The song, which featured Oakland rappers Luniz was used for three different scenes in the film, and is featured in two different places on the soundtrack, making it the only song to appear twice on one soundtrack. In 1998, Prince included the Shock G produced "Love Sign" on his triple-CD Crystal Ball album. Shock G has toured and performed on stage with George Clinton and P-Funk including a guest performance with Clinton at Woodstock 1999.In 2003, Shock G produced the single "Risky Business" for Los Angeles underground artist Murs, and also appeared in the video, as himself and as Humpty Hump. Murs performed this song live with Shock G at the Paid Dues festival, and also featured him as his stage DJ/music conductor on a 2-month extensive Definitive Jux label U.S. and Canada tour.  On January 20, 2009, Shock G's single "Cherry Flava'd Email" was renamed and released as a special edition called "Cherry Flava'd Election" to commemorate the inauguration of President Barack Obama.


== Death ==
On April 22, 2021, Jacobs was found dead in a motel room in Tampa, Florida, at age 57. On June 10, 2021, the Hillsborough County Medical Examiner announced that Shock G's death was caused by an accidental overdose of fentanyl, methamphetamine and ethanol (alcohol).Jacobs was interred at Parklawn Memorial Cemetery in Dunedin, Florida.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===
Fear of a Mixed Planet (2004)


=== Production discography ===


==== Albums ====
1990 Sex Packets, Digital Underground
1991 This Is an EP Release, Digital Underground (EP)
1991 Sons of the P, Digital Underground
1993 The Body Hat Syndrome, Digital Underground
1996 Future Rhythm, Digital Underground
1998 Who Got the Gravy, Digital Underground
1999 The Lost Files, Digital Underground
2008 ..Cuz a D.U. Party Don't Stop!, Digital Underground
2010 The Greenlight EP, Digital Underground


==== Songs ====
1987 "Your Life's a Cartoon", Digital Underground
1988 "Underwater Rimes", Digital Underground
1989 "Doowutchyalike", Digital Underground
1990 "Don't Funk wid the Mo" (remix), Monie Love
1990 "What I Won't Do for Love", 2Pac,  Schmoovy-Schmoov
1990 "What I Won't Do for Love (Shock G Remix)", 2Pac, Digital Underground
1991 "Rockin to the PM", Raw Fusion
1991 "Rebel of the Underground", 2Pac
1991 "Words of Wisdom", 2Pac
1991 "Revenge of the Lunatic", 2Pac, Money-B
1991 "Tellin' Time (Mike's Rap)", Dr. Dre, Michael Concepcion
1993 "I Get Around", 2Pac, Digital Underground
1993 "Get Away (remix)", Bobby Brown
1993 "Top of the World", Kenya Gruv (co-producer)
1994 "Dirty Drawls", Raw Fusion
1994 "Do Your Homework", Raw Fusion
1995 "Fuck the World", 2Pac, Shock G
1995 "So Many Tears", 2Pac
1995 "Broke Hos", Luniz
1995 "5150", Luniz
1995 "No Brothas Allowed", No Face
1995 "Smashin' Fruit", No Face
1995 "Nothing Has Changed", No Face feat. Digital Underground
1996 "We Got More", Shock G feat Luniz
1995 "Don't Ring My Bell", Luniz
1996 "People Over the Stairs", Shock G
1996 "Gloomy Sunday", Mystic
1997 "True Playas", Whoridas
1997 "Come N' Bounce", Shay
1997 "Cause I Had To", 2Pac & P-90
1998 "Broad Minded", Saafir
1998 "Sendin' U a Signal", Saafir
1998 "Love Sign", Prince
1999 "Crawl Before You Ball", Saafir
1999 "Liquid Ho Magnet", Saafir
1999 "Running Man", Saafir
2000 "Do What Ya Want", Rhythm & Green
2000 "Let the Beat Breathe", Esinchill
2001 "Chassy", Mac Mall
2001 "Intro", Mystic (album intro)
2002 "Risky Business", Murs
2004 "Smilin' Faces", KRS-One


=== Guest appearances ===
1990 "We're All in the Same Gang", Westcoast Allstars, (song & video)
1990 "Time for Peace", Davey-D feat D.U., Paris, Tech & Sway, (song)
1991 "Trapped", 2Pac, (song & video)
1991 "Throw Your Hands in the Air", Raw Fusion, (video)
1991 "Funkintoyoear", Raw Fusion, (song)
1992 "Money", Gold Money, (song & video)
1993 "I Get Around", 2Pac feat. Digital Underground, (song & video)
1993 "Rhythm & Rhyme", George Clinton, (song)
1993 "Paint the White House Black", George Clinton, Ice Cube, Kam, Yo-Yo, Dr. Dre, Public Enemy, Pupa Curly, (song & video)
1994 "Freaky Note", Raw Fusion, (song & video)
1995 "I Got 5 on It (Remix)", Luniz, (song & video)
1995 "Funk Session", Too Short, (song)
1995 "So Many Tears", ""2Pac, (song)
1995 "Fuck the World", 2Pac, (song)
1996 "Knee Deep (Midnight Mix)", George Clinton, (song)
1999 "Glayz Donutt Face", C-Funk, (song)
1999 "Miss Bartender", Money-B, (song)
1999 "Do What You Want to Do", Vitamin C, (song)
2000 "No DNA", Clee & Drank-a-Lot, (song)
2002 "Wuz Crackulatin'," 2wice, (song)
2002 "Risky Business", Murs, (song & video)
2003 "Way of Life", Stylophonic, (song)
2004 "Hurry Up Run", Shock G, (song)
2004 "Snake and the Apple", Stucky, (song)
2004 "At the Next Show", Sir Mix-a-lot, (song)
2005 "Career Finders", Perceptionists, (song)
2005 "Say What You Say", Soma Rasa, (song)
2005 "And 2morrow", various artists, (song)
2005 "California Girls Dipped in Chocolate", Slapbak, (song)
2005 "Freaky Pumps", Fat Lip, (song)
2005 "City to City", Straw, (song)
2005 "Love Letters", 2Pac, Rappin' 4-Tay, Assassin, (song)
2006 "The Wizard", Mr. Rakafela, (song)
2006 "If You're True", InershA, (song)
2006 "Pain and Misery (remix)", InershA, (song)
2006 "Shock G Interlude", 2Pac (song)
2007 "Shock G's Outro/Hidden Track", Ássassin, Ray Luv, 2Pac
2007 "California Dreamin", San Quinn, Assassin, (song)
2007 "Plainfield", Bernie Worrell, (song)
2007 "Smack Dat Ass", Ditch, (song)
2008 ..Cuz a D.U. Party Don't Stop!, Digital Underground, (album)
2008 "Crazy", Maddie Lauer, (song & video)
2008 "Light of Love feat. Lady Alma", Yameen (song, as keyboardist)
2009 "Cherry Flava'd Election", Shock G, (song)
2010 The Greenlight EP, Digital Underground, (album)
2012 Cuttynclean JC – "Above the Tip Tops" (album- Shade of Purp) CO cuttyncleanrecords type on SoundCloud
2014 Cuttynclean JC – "Shock G interlude" (album – Shade of Purp) co cuttyncleanrecords
2015 "The Mini", Angelo Knox (song)
2017 Cuttynclean JC – "Diamonds" feat. Asap Lotto (unreleased)
2018 "Heem", Undaflow feat. Shock G and Big Sharp
2019 Cuttynclean JC – "Keep It PI" feat Mistah fab and Moe Green


=== Digital Underground videos ===
"Doowutchyalike" (1989)
"The Humpty Dance" (1989)
"Doowutchyalike" (video remix) (1990)
"Same Song" (1991)
"Kiss You Back" (1991)
"No Nose Job" (1992)
"Return of the Crazy One" (1993)
"Wussup Wit the Luv" (1994)
"Oregano Flow" (1996)
"Walk Real Kool" (1996)
"Wind Me Up" (1998)


=== Featured guest video appearances ===
"We're All in the Same Gang" (1990) Westcoast All-Stars
"Throw Your Hands in the Air" (1991) Raw Fusion
"Trapped" (1991) 2Pac
"Money" (1992) Gold Money
"Close the Crackhouse" (1992) X-Clan
"I Get Around" (1993) 2Pac featuring Digital Underground
"No Brothas Allowed" (1994) No Face
"I Got 5 on It (Bay Ballas Remix)" (1995) Luniz
"Temptations" (1995) 2Pac
"Risky Business" (2003) Murs
"Hit the Streets" (2003) Element
"City to City" (2005) Straw the Vegas Don
"Crazy" (2008) Maddie Lauer


=== DVDs ===
Nothing But Trouble (1991)
Thug Angel: The Life of an Outlaw (2000)
Tupac: Resurrection (2003)
Digital Underground: Raw and Uncut (2004)
Parliament/Funkadelic; One Nation Under a Groove (2005)


== References ==


== External links ==
Shock G discography at Discogs 
Shock G at IMDb
Shock G at Find a GraveWilliam Antonio Daniels ((1992-07-25)July 25, 1992 – (2020-05-05)May 5, 2020), better known by his stage name Kiing Shooter, was an American rapper from Queensbridge, New York. Kiing Shooter first came into the public eye alongside NYC rapper and longtime friend Dave East, after releasing numerous freestyles with the rapper in 2017. Kiing Shooter gained recognition with his single "They Say" which was released on June 29, 2018. He subsequently released his debut EP Fucc The Doubters on August 24, 2018, with features from Dave East, Don Q and Mac and it peaked at 148 on the US Billboard 200.
His second EP, No Turning Bacc was released on April 20, 2019, and his debut Solo LP Still Outside dropped on March 27, 2020. Shooter was signed to Nas's Mass Appeal record label and Nas's brother Jungle's Street Dreams record label.


== Career ==
Kiing Shooter was a long-time friend of rapper Dave East and has always been around the mainstream artist when touring and performing since 2015, although he never took an interest in taking rapping seriously until 2017. Kiing Shooter made numerous appearances on East's mixtapes, once he started his own label "From The Dirt" in March, 2018. East was subsequently featured on the single "Eye Witness" by Kiing Shooter on June 9, 2018, and the music video had a guest appearances from rapper Snoop Dogg. He was featured on the single "Traumatized" by Dave East which peaked at 42 on the US Billboard 200 on August 11, 2018.Kiing Shooter released his debut extended play Fucc The Doubters on August 24, 2018. It featured guest appearances from Dave East, Don Q, Corey Finesse amongst others. It was released via East's label "From the Dirt" and peaked at 148 on the US Billboard 200. The album was noted for its authenticity, drive and rise, gaining the attention of New York rap legend, Jungle. Jungle launched his own record label, Street Dream Records, and signed Kiing Shooter in February 2019.Kiing Shooter released his second EP No Turning Bacc on April 20, 2019. It featured appearances from Corey Finesse, Piif Jones amongst others and was released via "Street Dreams Records". It was supported by the single "If I Could Talk To Them" which dropped on May 9, 2019, in which he reflects on the many losses he has faced on the road to success, including family, friends and collaborators. Kiing Shooter and Dave East both remixed Pop Smoke's Welcome to the Party on August 10, 2019. He was featured on the single "Say Less" by British rapper ASB which was released via GRM Daily on August 20, 2019. The pair went on to support Dave East on his Survival Tour which spanned from November 22, 2019 – December 20, 2019.On March 13, 2020, Shooter released the single "Losses" featuring Uncle Murda after teasing an album art for the song on Instagram in January. The single was to go on and be the lead single of his third project Still Outside which was released on March 27, 2020. The 11 track mixtape also contained features from Corey Finesse, Dave East, Mac Dre, Jazzy Amra, PNV Jay and Poppa Da Don via Street Dream Records and Mass Appeal Records.


== Artistry ==
His artistry has been compared to rappers such as Dave East and Don Q, and he is known for his aggressive style of rap. He is noted for his bars that are setting sights and sounds of East Coast culture in his music.


== Death ==

Daniels was admitted to hospital on April 23, 2020, after showing symptoms of cirrhosis. His condition got worse over time and on May 5, 2020, it was confirmed that he had died of liver failure. It was reported that the liver failure may have been due to complications with COVID-19 during the COVID-19 pandemic in New York City, though his friend David Brewster (Dave East) quickly denounced this on social media. Daniels himself said the cause of his liver problem was due to the excessive consumption of Hennessy. Numerous contemporaries including label managers Nas and Jungle as well as fellow rappers Dave East, ASB, Uncle Murda paid tribute to the deceased rapper. A vigil was held the following day in Daniels hometown of Queensbridge, New York. Due to the current COVID-19 pandemic in the United States, three people were arrested after violating social distancing rules in which a minimum of 75 people attended.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===
Still Outside (2020)


=== Extended plays ===
Fucc The Doubters (2018)
No Turning Bacc (2019)
I Am Kiing (2022)


== References ==


== External links ==
Kiing Shooter at AllMusicMoses Michael Levi Barrow (born Jamal Michael Barrow, best known by his stage name Shyne; November 8, 1978) is a Belizean rapper and politician. He is the Leader of the Opposition in the Belize House of Representatives, and the leader of the Belize United Democratic Party. Barrow was born in Belize but moved to Brooklyn in New York City as a child and began to rap as a teenager. He is perhaps best known for his 2000 singles "Bad Boyz" and "Bonnie & Shyne". He also wrote and performed on a number of multi-platinum albums, such as Usher's Confessions, Lil Wayne's Carter IV, Notorious B.I.G's Born Again, Mase's Double Up, and Puff Daddy's Forever among other top-selling albums during his tenures with his former labels, Bad Boy Records and Def Jam Recordings.
Shyne and his mother lived in the Brooklyn neighborhood of East Flatbush, where after he was discovered as he was singing in a barbershop, he became a musician and rapper. On the verge of releasing his debut album, on the evening of December 27, 1999, he went to a nightclub with his mentor/label boss Sean Combs, and Combs' then-girlfriend singer/actress Jennifer Lopez. An argument broke out in the club between Combs and another man, guns were drawn, shots fired, and three bystanders were injured. In June 2001 he was convicted of assault, and sentenced to 10 years in prison. His 2000 debut album was nevertheless a success, and he continued to record music while incarcerated.
While serving his prison sentence, Shyne became interested in Judaism, became observant – practicing Orthodox Judaism, and  officially changed his name to Moses Michael Levi Barrow in 2006. After he was released from prison in 2009, he was deported to Belize. In 2010, he moved to Jerusalem, where he spent his time studying the Torah up to 12 hours a day. He returned to Belize in 2013, and was appointed the Belize Music and Goodwill Ambassador, charged with the sustainable development of the music industry in Belize, and donated hundreds of thousands of dollars to develop it.
Shyne was elected to the Belizean House of Representatives in the 2020 general election, as a member of the center-right Belize United Democratic Party. He became the Belize Leader of the Opposition in the House of Representatives and the leader of the Belize United Democratic Party, in both June 2021 (until September 2021) and February 2022.


== Early life ==
Shyne was born Jamal Michael Barrow, in Belize City in Belize in Central America, to Frances Imeon Myvette and Dean Barrow, who were not married. Shyne's mother is the sister of Michael Myvett, now going by the surname Finnegan, one of Dean Barrow's long-time political colleagues in Belize. Barrow's middle name comes from his uncle. Shyne's Jewish maternal grandmother had emigrated from Ethiopia to Belize.As a child, Barrow's time was divided between his mother in Brooklyn, New York City, and his lawyer/politician father, who initially failed to acknowledge his son, and was years later elected in 2008 as the first black Prime Minister of Belize.  Barrow's mother moved to the United States when he was three years old, leaving her son with his father who was busy with politics, and left Shyne between the care of his mother's brother Michael and father's sister Denise in Belize City. His father was in a relationship with another woman, and Barrow recalls: "The nigga said his two other kids were made out of love. It was devastating. That shit really fucked me up."When he was seven years old, Barrow moved to Brooklyn to live with his mother in Crown Heights and then East Flatbush, in near poverty, while spending summers in Belize with his father. His mother supported them by cleaning homes and taking care of children, and he slept on the sofa in their small apartment on Church Avenue and East 18th Street. After he moved to Brooklyn, he began to develop a strong interest in the hip-hop culture of the 1980s and 1990s. At age 15, while in a fight he was shot in his right shoulder by another kid in Flatbush, Brooklyn, leaving him with a six-inch scar.After graduating high school three years later, part of the time of which he spent attending high school in Belize at Wesley College in 1993, he enrolled in a New York City College of Technology computer program. He paid for his tuition by working as a bike messenger, buying an 18-speed bicycle and riding it from Brooklyn over the Brooklyn Bridge into Manhattan, where he made deliveries around the borough. He left NYC College of Technology to pursue a career in music.


== Early music career ==


=== 1997–99: Career beginnings, and signing to Bad Boy ===
In 1998, while Barrow was freestyling in a barbershop on Church Avenue in Brooklyn, he was discovered by hip hop producer DJ Clark Kent, who was working on the Notorious B.I.G.'s first posthumous album, Born Again. He quickly took Barrow to Bad Boy Studios, where Sean "Puff Daddy" Combs signed him on the spot to his label. It was reported that Shyne received millions of dollars, 3 cars of his choice and 2 homes just for signing. The contract also included a 5 studio album deal. This caused a small media shockwave. He abruptly had his life shift from sleeping on his mother's couch, to jetting to Beverly Hills first class to record with top rappers in hip-hop.Not long after, Shyne began making appearances on recordings made by his Bad Boy Entertainment label-mates. He was notably featured on Mase's second album, Double Up (1999), and on a remix of Total's "Sittin At Home" single. In the same year he featured on chief executive Combs' second studio album Forever.


== Club New York shooting ==


=== Shooting and trial (1999–2001) ===
In the early hours of December 27, 1999, Shyne and his mentor/label boss, Sean Combs, and Combs' then-girlfriend singer/actress Jennifer Lopez, were involved in a shooting incident. The three of them were at a Manhattan nightclub named Club New York, on West 43rd Street in Times Square. Witnesses said that a felon named Matthew "Scar" Allen started an argument with Combs. Witnesses later  testified that Allen also threatened to kill Shyne.Prosecutors charged that Allen, Combs, and Shyne all drew guns, and that Shyne shot three times in the packed nightclub. The shooting resulted in three bystanders being injured. Shyne was accused by prosecutors as was Combs of drawing a gun in the confrontation; Shyne said he acted in self-defense. One injured witness said she saw both Combs and Shyne shoot guns. Shyne was accused of firing three shots that wounded three people; he maintained that he had fired into the air, and did not believe that it was bullets from his gun that injured the bystanders. At his trial, an eyewitness and a ballistics expert testified that the three injuries may have been caused not by Shyne but by a second gunman, and the ballistics expert said that at least one injury may have been caused by a 40 caliber weapon while Shyne had a 9 millimeter gun; 40-caliber shells were found on the floor.Shyne was convicted at trial by a jury on two counts of assault and of reckless endangerment, and criminal possession of an illegal weapon, after a seven-week trial alongside Combs. He was acquitted of charges of attempted murder, on a third count of intentional assault in the first degree of a third victim, and one other count.  He was sentenced on June 1, 2001, to ten years in prison, without eligibility for parole until 2009; he served almost nine years in New York prisons.Conrad Tillard, then known as Hip-Hop Minister Conrad Muhammad, said: "Shyne's mother and grandmother placed this young man in the care and custody of Sean "Puffy" Combs, who they believed was a responsible executive of a company. Puffy has the same responsibility as a teacher, as a coach. This boy, Shyne, was out with his idol on that fateful night. When I put my child in your hands, I don't expect him to end up dead or in jail."Combs and his bodyguard, in contrast, were acquitted on all counts. Combs had been arrested and charged with illegally having two 9-millimeter guns and with bribery but was acquitted of the charges at the trial. Combs' bodyguard, who had been charged with illegal possession of a gun and bribery, was also acquitted at the trial.Shyne's debut album was released in 2000 and was successful.


=== Incarceration (2001-09) ===
Shyne began serving his sentence at the maximum security prison Clinton Correctional Facility in Dannemora, New York. This seemed to spell the end of his rap career; his legal team's appeal for a suspended sentence ultimately failed. Shyne severed all ties with Sean Combs and Bad Boy Records.In March 2006 he changed his name legally, to Moses Michael Levi Barrow. He had already been studying Judaism at the time of his arrest. In prison, with rabbis he became a practicing Jew, keeping kosher, and celebrating the Jewish Sabbath and Jewish holidays.Barrow has said that from the age of 13, he began to identify as an Israelite, after learning that his great-grandmother was a descendant of the Beta Israel, ancient Ethiopian Jews. As a teenager, he began to study Judaism and the Old Testament on his own, and to pray daily. He formally converted to Orthodox Judaism in Jerusalem, Israel, in 2010.In 2006 Shyne went to court to challenge New York's application of the 'Son of Sam' law, which had resulted in his assets being frozen and which limited his ability to make record deals and generate income. He and his lawyers argued that by the court allowing Shyne to make deals with record producers, it would enable him to pay a higher potential settlement to victims of the night club shooting, who were separately pursuing a civil suit against him.Despite his convictions, his incarceration drew many sympathizers, as well as the admiration of many in the hip hop community. His adherence to the code of silence, which he referred to several times on his eponymous debut album, earned him a hardcore reputation in the prison community and on the streets. Even while incarcerated, he was visited by representatives of record labels who wanted to make deals. At the same time, Shyne was not without detractors. Fellow New York rapper 50 Cent called him a "punk," and made light of his situation and his part in the "night club incident." Shyne retaliated on his 2004 release Godfather Buried Alive, with a track entitled "For the Record".Describing his nine years of incarceration, Shyne said: 

The entire process was devastating.... ten hours of incarceration is ten hours too much. So, for a human being to be animalized for ten years, there is no quick fix to that.... It's like being shot by an assailant, and you are running away for your life. You didn't even realize you got shot in your leg because you are running on adrenaline. It's not until you get to a place of safety that you realize you have a hole in your leg, and you collapse; you can't stand up, and that was that experience was for me. When I came out I didn't even realize how wounded and devastated I was because I numbed myself to the pain and destruction that I suffered.
I remember my mother used to come and see me on the visit floor. My mother couldn't look at me; she would start to shake, and she would go off the floor and go to the bathroom. I couldn't process that because if I cried in front of her then that would make her life go to shambles. If I cried in front of the prison guard, they would think that I was weak. So I go back to the yard and lift some weights, smoke a cigar, and act like nothing happened.

When you come out from that, how do you recover ...? How do you put back your life together?


=== Release and deportation (2009) ===
On October 26, 2009, Shyne was released and deported to his place of birth, Belize. Some of the hip hop community rallied to celebrate his release, and the events were followed by mainstream media.The rapper had been transferred to Rikers Island where he was held for a parole hearing, and then to the Woodbourne Correctional Facility, where he spent the last months of his incarceration. A Manhattan judge signed an order that would schedule Shyne for release on October 6, 2009. He had served more than 9 years of a 10-year sentence, on which no terms for post-release supervision had originally been placed. At the request of the New York State Department of Correctional Services, a mandatory probation period of at least two and half years was added to Shyne's sentence. Shyne and his attorney, Oscar Michelen, had hoped to avoid probation.On October 6, 2009, Shyne was released from New York State custody; however, he was immediately taken into Federal custody. He was detained by U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement at a "detention facility in Western New York State". One source indicated that the facility in question was the Buffalo Federal Detention Facility in Batavia. According to his attorney, Federal officials were reviewing the rapper's immigration status and making a determination on whether or not he would be deported to his native Belize. Shyne had a permanent resident "green card", and his mother was a U.S. citizen, but he himself had never become a naturalized citizen. There was speculation that Shyne might be released on bail in the U.S. while his case was being resolved.Shyne's uncle, Michael Finnegan, said that the family had prepared for the rapper's potential return to Belize. He also revealed that Shyne and his representatives had been expecting to be intercepted by ICE officials upon his release, and had directed  members of his legal team to prepare the necessary documents in an effort to address the situation. Dean Barrow, Belize's Prime Minister and Shyne's father, sent a petition to New York Governor David Paterson asking Patterson to pardon his son. In 2008 Governor Paterson had pardoned rapper Slick Rick who, in a similar situation, also faced deportation. Barrow said he had been assured that the Governor received his letter and that his request was under consideration, but that he did not expect to have any influence in swaying the decision.His family enlisted the assistance of Charles Ogletree, an attorney and Harvard Law School professor, and part of President Barack Obama's circle, in Shyne's attempt to forestall deportation and later to regain entry into the U.S. In October 2009, Finnegan said  that all legal matters regarding Shyne's case had been turned over to Ogletree. Nevertheless, Shyne was deported to Belize on October 28, 2009, though he continued to fight without success for residency in the United States.  Given that he was a convicted felon, the U.S. would not allow him back into the country.


== Post-deportation ==
In 2009, upon his return to Belize, he reconnected with his estranged father.In February 2010, the rapper was refused entry into the United Kingdom due to his conviction as a felon. He had begun his journey in Cancun, Mexico, but was deported upon arrival in the UK after immigration officials refused to allow him to enter the country.


=== Jerusalem ===
In 2010 Shyne moved to Jerusalem.  In November 2010, he was living in Jerusalem, having become observant and changing his name officially to Moses Michael Levi. He spent his time learning the Torah, and spent up to 12 hours a day studying it.  He said that there was nothing at odds between the hip-hop world and being a Torah-observant Jew, saying: "There's nothing in the Chumash that says I can't drive a Lamborghini."In Jerusalem, he underwent a formal conversion to Orthodox Judaism. He also prayed wearing Jewish ritual tefillin in the mornings, studied Talmud with rigorous strictly Orthodox rabbis at the Or Sameach, Belz, and Mir yeshivas, and grew payot (sidecurls; worn by some men in the Orthodox Jewish community based on their interpretation of the requirements of Jewish law). He had studied seriously with rabbis while in prison, and adopted the Jewish laws to create boundaries and order in his life. He officially changed his name to Moses Levi to reflect his commitment to Judaism. He said: "My entire life screams that I have a Jewish neshama ["soul", in Hebrew]."In December 2011, almost 12 years after the initial shooting, back in New York City, Matthew "Scar" Allen was shot and killed outside of Brooklyn's Footprints nightclub.In April 2012, Shyne traveled to Kyiv, Ukraine, where he was a featured speaker at a conference on inter-religious understanding.  The conference – called Global Winds of Change: Religions' Role in Today's World;The Challenges in Democracies and Secular Societies – brought together members of the world's many faiths to discuss the role of religion in modern society. Oleksandr Feldman, a member of the Ukrainian parliament and the President of the Ukrainian Jewish Committee, hosted the three-day event.


=== Return to Belize ===
In 2013, Shyne returned to Belize. In 2017, he married a businesswoman named Catherine, and a year later they had a daughter, Naomi.He returned to the U.S. for a visit in August 2021. In March 2022, Shyne received a Doctorate of Humane Letters (honoris causa) from the University of Liberia for his life's work "as a Humanitarian, Musician, and Legislator."


== Later music career ==


=== 1999–2008: Shyne, prison, and Godfather Buried Alive ===
Shyne released Shyne (album) in September 2000. The album featured guest appearances from Barrington Levy and 112's Slim, as well as production from Bad Boy's in-house producers The Hitmen. Shyne's self-titled debut album was recorded prior to the rapper's arrest. It made Billboard's number five spot on the charts, rose to the top of the Urban charts, and sold more than 900,000 copies.Many labels met with Shyne while he was incarcerated at the Clinton Correctional Facility. The rapper ultimately signed with Def Jam Records for a $3 million contract.In 2004, Shyne released his second album Godfather Buried Alive, while imprisoned. The album, partially recorded prior to imprisonment and partially during his imprisonment over the phone in calls from prison, sold 434,000 copies, and debuted very strongly at number three on Billboard's album chart, and hit No. 1 on Billboard's Top R&B/Hip-Hop chart. Given that he was imprisoned, it did so without the benefit of the standard concert tour, and appearances on radio stations. Furthermore, as he had started to observe the Jewish Sabbath, he was completely unavailable for any publicity contacts on Friday nights and Saturdays.


=== 2009–present: Release from prison and third album ===
Upon his early release in 2009 from his 10-year prison sentence, the Belize native was deported to his homeland as a non-citizen felon.On February 16, 2010, Shyne signed a seven-figure deal with Def Jam Records.
After a trip to Jerusalem, Israel, in 2010, where he formally converted to Orthodox Judaism and underwent a symbolic circumcision, Shyne collaborated with Jewish-American reggae and rock musician Matisyahu on his single "Messiah", released in April 2010. He released "Roller Song" in 2010.He later announced that he was recording two LPs for release in 2010, and Def Jam Records, the largest hip-hop label, approached him to sign a distribution agreement. Messiah was set to be the first of his 2010 release schedule, while Gangland, was set to be his second.In October 2010, Shyne criticized Def Jam and announced hopes of signing to Cash Money Records: "I'm definitely trying to get with Cash Money…. I'm not signed to Def Jam anyway, I just need to find another distributor. I might just have Cash Money do everything. Who knows? That's the beauty about being in the business for yourself. You can decide where you want to go and what you want to do."Although he blamed Def Jam CEO L.A. Reid for his frustration, later that month Shyne issued an apology. In November 2010, Birdman said that Shyne's deportation had stalled his Cash Money deal, as it would prevent him from appearing in the US.In 2011 he performed in Jerusalem, forming a collaboration with Matisyahu. Shyne made a surprise guest appearance in the Matisyahu and HaDag Nachash concert in Jerusalem's Kikar Safra on June 23, 2011. He rapped into Matisyahu's set for "King Without a Crown". He shouted "Free Jonathan Pollard, Free Gilad Shalit" to thunderous applause before he exited the stage. Matisyahu and Shyne have shared Judaism and have become best friends. They have discussed collaborating more frequently in the future.In August 2011, Shyne appeared on the track "Outro", from Lil Wayne's platinum-selling ninth studio album Tha Carter IV (2011), along with Bun B, Nas and Busta Rhymes. In December 2011, Shyne said signing to Cash Money Records "is still a possibility". In March 2012, Shyne and Diddy finally reconciled. The two were photographed together at Fashion Week in Paris; Diddy tweeted, "Me and Shyne Po front row at Kenzo #ParisIsBurning RT to da world!!!!", and Shyne said: "It's a new day. L'chaim!"In 2012, Shyne released a mixtape, Gangland. Shyne called out Rick Ross, due to his blasphemous Black Bar Mitzvah mixtape, as well as Jewish-Canadian rapper Drake. He has recorded diss tracks towards Diddy, Swag Blanket's DLSupreme and 50 Cent.In November 2012, Shyne became involved in a feud with West Coast rapper Game, after Shyne described West Coast rapper Kendrick Lamar's debut album good kid, m.A.A.d city as "trash". Shyne dissed Game on tracks such as "Bury Judas" and "Psalms 68 (Guns & Moses)". These tracks reflected his study of Judaism.Complex Magazine in December 2012 noted Shyne on its list of rapper stars who had suffered the "30 worst fall-offs in rap history", ranking him as # 23. But Shyne's Gangland mixtape appeared to reflect a revival of his popularity; it was downloaded more than 100,000 times on DatPiff.com, earning him a "Gold" ranking.


== Political career ==
In May 2010, Shyne was appointed the Belize Music and Goodwill Ambassador. Over the years, he brought Combs, Kanye West, and J. Prince to Belize, promoted the country, and worked with its youth.In October 2012, Shyne, critical of the Obama administration, endorsed Republican nominee Mitt Romney for president of the United States, faulting incumbent President Obama for not doing anything to prevent the rapper's deportation to Belize. Asked if black voters should vote based on race alone, Shyne said: "I don't believe in all that, if you black you get a pass."In 2020, Shyne was nominated by the center-right Belize United Democratic Party to stand as a candidate for the Belize House of Representatives in the Belize City-based Mesopotamia constituency in the 2020 Belizean general election. On November 11, 2020, Barrow won the House of Representatives seat for Mesopotamia.  Part of his platform is to strengthen Belizean governance with increased penalties for those who commit crimes, to raise the salaries of its police, to strengthen the judicial system so as to address violent crime, and for the government to provide student loans at low interest rates.Shyne was subsequently also appointed the Opposition Leader in the House of Representatives and the leader of the Belize United Democratic Party, in both June 2021 (until September 2021) and February 2022. He returned to the US for a state visit in August 2021, meeting with US politicians. The Atlanta City Council dесlаrеd Аuguѕt 20, 2021, Ѕhуnе Ваrrоw Dау "fоr hіѕ dеdісаtіоn, соmmіtmеnt аnd ѕеrvісе tо the grеаt реорlе оf Веlіzе, Сеntrаl Аmеrіса." He hopes to be elected Belize's next prime minister in 2025.


== Discography ==

Studio albumsShyne (2000)
Godfather Buried Alive (2004)


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Shyne at Allmusic
Shyne at IMDb
Twitter pageDwight Equan Grant (born March 6, 1974), better known by his stage name Beanie Sigel, is an American rapper. He first became known for his association with Jay-Z and Roc-A-Fella Records, releasing his debut studio album The Truth through Roc-A-Fella in February 2000 to critical and commercial success.Sigel's second studio album, The Reason, saw similar commercial success, but received mixed reviews from critics. His third album, The B. Coming, was critically acclaimed and peaked at number 3 on the Billboard 200. After a short break from music, Sigel returned to Roc-A-Fella in 2007 and released his fourth studio album The Solution in December 2007 to positive reviews. After leaving Roc-A-Fella once again, Sigel's fifth and sixth studio albums, The Broad Street Bully and This Time were released independently in 2009 and 2012, respectively.
Sigel is also known for his numerous legal issues, including a 2004–2005 trial for attempted murder (he was found not guilty).


== Career ==


=== Roc-A-Fella and Def Jam years (1999–2006) ===
Roc-A-Fella Records released Beanie Sigel's debut album, The Truth  on February 29, 2000, to critical and commercial success.
In 2002, Sigel and much of the Roc-A-Fella roster starred in State Property. Its release coincided with the creation and promotion of State Property, a group of Philadelphia artists signed to Roc-A-Fella, who were organized by Sigel and Freeway. Its members included Peedi Crakk, the Young Gunz (Neef Buck & Young Chris), Oschino and Omillio Sparks. Their first collaboration was for the movie's soundtrack, an eponymous release that featured the original "Roc the Mic" by Sigel and Freeway. 2003's The Chain Gang Vol. 2 followed, featuring the single "Can't Stop, Won't Stop" by the Young Gunz. The record was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group.In 2005, before serving a one-year prison sentence stemming from an earlier arrest, Sigel shot multiple videos, directed by Joe Briscella, and finished his third album The B. Coming. During this time, Sigel's label head at Roc-A-Fella, Jay-Z, became president of its parent label, Def Jam, which caused former business partners Damon Dash and Kareem "Biggs" Burke to leave and form the Dame Dash Music Group. Dame Dash Music Group and Def Jam released Sigel's The B. Coming rather than Roc-A-Fella, but it still contained production from a slew of Roc/Jay Z-affiliated producers including Chad West, The Neptunes, Just Blaze, Boola, and Buckwild. Sigel recruited cross–label MC talent for his album as well, including Cam'ron and Jay-Z. Sigel's record produced a hit track, "Feel It in the Air", and sold 131,000 copies in its first week.Advertising his friendship with the incarcerated Sigel, Dash publicly claimed that he was leaving the Roc-A-Fella roster to join him. Sigel's group, State Property was thrown into turmoil, but eventually chose to remain at Roc-A-Fella—apparently against Sigel's wishes. On his release, Sigel questioned the loyalty of his group and said that he was signing with Dame and Biggs due to a stronger relationship with the pair than with Jay-Z:

I've never been around Jay on an off day. It ain't like I made a choice of running with Dame and Biggs or 'Dame and Biggs held me down through my whole trial.' It's not that. I would be a sucker if I said I [signed with the Damon Dash Music Group] because they did that for me. It's love. You see how we chillin' now, this ain't about no business.
Soon after, he clarified his comments, saying he simply did not want to be involved in the conflict, and elected to re-open talks with Roc-A-Fella instead of moving to Dame Dash Music Group.In 2006, Sigel re-signed with Roc-A-Fella Records and started recording for his fourth studio album The Solution. On October 29, 2007, Sigel released the first single from The Solution titled "All The Above" which featured R. Kelly. It debuted on the U.S. R&B charts at number 83. On May 22, 2007, Sigel released The Solution  which debuted on the Billboard charts at number 37.


=== Post Roc-A-Fella (2007–present) ===
In 2009, Sigel released his first independent album The Broad Street Bully after his contracts with Roc-A-Fella Records and Def Jam Records had expired.
In 2010, Sigel announced that he was working on his sixth studio album titled The Closure which was to be released on Universal Republic and G-Unit Records. However, on May 31, 2011, Sigel cancelled the album and retired from the music industry for two weeks, before deciding to return and work on the album again, re-titling it The Classic. In 2011, Sigel signed with 50 Cent's subsidiary label G-Unit Philly and renewed his 2009 contract with G-Unit Records. On July 13, 2011, Sigel released his first single from the album titled "B-Boy Stance".
On March 30, 2012, Sigel told Statik Selektah on Shade 45 that he would be working on a collaborative album with his longtime close friend, the Southern rap veteran Scarface; the album was to be called Mac and Brad. Scarface tweeted the announcement at the same time via mobile. On that same day, while distribution deals with E1, The Orchard, and Asylum were on the table, Sigel also decided to sign a distribution deal with EMI after one of his mutual friends garnered the interest of Chris Schwartz. Under Schwartz's guidance, Sigel released a new mixtape, followed by his studio album This Time.


=== Acting ===
Sigel first appeared in the documentary Backstage, and his first main acting role was in the movie State Property which spawned a sequel State Property 2. He also appeared along with Kevin Hart in the 2002 film Paper Soldiers. Sigel released a DVD titled The B. Coming of Beanie Sigel in 2005, shortly after his third solo album release The B. Coming.In 2006, Sigel was interviewed in the Rap Sheet: Hip-Hop and the Cops documentary, which exposed rappers to the dossiers maintained by NYPD as part of their effort to surveil hip-hop artists and executives. He also auditioned for the lead role in the 2009 film Notorious.Sigel appeared in the 2011 film Rhyme and Punishment, a documentary about hip-hop artists who have served time in county jail or state/federal prison. The film features an interview with Sigel in which he discusses his conviction and life while incarcerated.


== Feuds ==


=== Jay-Z ===
Sigel recorded a song dissing his former boss and mentor Jay-Z on the track "I Go Off" with 50 Cent who had signed him to his G-Unit Records label in 2009. On May 31, 2011, it was reported that Sigel had apologized to Jay-Z. However, in an interview with DJ Green Lantern, he said that he had never "apologized" to Jay-Z, and that he was still making music.In 2015, Sigel and Jay-Z reunited at the Tidal B-Sides Concert and performed together, ending the feud.


=== Jadakiss ===
During the beginning of the new millennium, Sigel and various other Roc artists engaged in a conflict with artists from the Ruff Ryders. Sigel publicly decried Jadakiss, the rest of The LOX and DMX. Although Sigel and Jadakiss both denied any violent intent, they continued to exchange criticism until Sigel put out a freestyle rap over Jadakiss' hit "Put Ya Hands Up".


=== Meek Mill ===
On September 26, 2016, Sigel and Meek Mill, a former friend and neighbor, got into an altercation when Sigel ridiculed Mill's intelligence and claimed to be "the ruler of all of Philly" during a radio interview. Minutes after the interview, someone who was believed to have been one of Meek Mill's affiliates, punched Sigel on the back of his head. Three days later, Mill criticized Sigel via Instagram. He also dissed Sigel again in a freestyle on Funkmaster Flex's radio show. Sigel responded by releasing his own diss track titled "I'm Coming".


== Personal life ==
Sigel is a Sunni Muslim.


=== Legal issues ===
In 2002, Sigel was arrested and charged with a federal weapons charge in West Philadelphia. He would later serve a year in federal prison.Sigel was arrested in January 2003 after allegedly punching a 53-year-old man in the face, fracturing his eye socket. On July 3, 2003, Sigel turned himself in to Philadelphia police and was charged with attempted murder after allegedly firing six shots from a 9 mm handgun at a club door, injuring two people. He was also charged with aggravated assault, simple assault and possession of a criminal instrument. His first trial ended in a hung jury. A second trial resulted in a not-guilty verdict.In 2004, Sigel was convicted of federal weapons charges and sentenced to one year and one day in federal prison.Sigel was shot multiple times during a robbery in Philadelphia on May 25, 2006. He was able to flee the scene and drive himself to a local hospital. One month prior to this incident, Sigel was released from prison after serving a brief stint for child support charges.On August 15, 2009, Sigel was arrested on a drug possession charge while traveling to a concert in New Jersey. He was found in possession of nearly 50 grams (1.8 oz) of marijuana in his vehicle.Sigel was charged in 2010 with three counts of failing to file tax returns on income of over $1 million between 2003 and 2005. He pled guilty to the charges and was sentenced to 25 months in prison.On August 29, 2012, two weeks before reporting to prison, Sigel was arrested again in Philadelphia on drug, weapons, and conspiracy charges after being pulled over by police. Officers found a fully loaded .38-caliber Smith & Wesson handgun inside the vehicle, as well as $4,500 in cash, an unlabeled bottle of codeine cough syrup, and various pills. Sigel began his 24-month sentence for failing to file tax returns at the Federal Detention Center, Philadelphia on September 12, 2012. Additionally, he was sentenced six to 23 months in county jail for illegal possession of prescription drugs, to be served concurrently with his federal sentence.On August 14, 2014, Sigel was released from Federal Correctional Institution, Schuylkill and was reported to be serving out the rest of his sentence in a halfway house in Philadelphia. Sigel was wounded in a drive-by shooting outside his Pleasantville, New Jersey home on December 5, 2014. He was rushed to the hospital where he had a lung removed due to complications during surgery. According to police, Sigel was not the intended victim.


== Discography ==

Studio albumsThe Truth (2000)
The Reason (2001)
The B. Coming (2005)
The Solution (2007)
The Broad Street Bully (2009)
This Time (2012)Collaboration albumsState Property OST (with State Property) (2002)
The Chain Gang Vol. 2 (with State Property) (2003)
The Roc Boys (with Freeway) (2010)


== References ==


== External links ==Jerome Albert Evans Jr., known as Silkski, was an American rapper, songwriter, and music producer who is known from his affiliation with Ol' Dirty Bastard (ODB) and the Wu-Tang Clan, whose affiliates are known as the Wu-Tang Killa Beez. Silkski is a PYN, Wu-Tang Management, Da Gutta Ent., Bungalo, Street Scholar, Universal Music Group artist and was a member of Brooklyn Zu. Silkski died October 28, 2016. He is survived by his wife Linnette Evans (Diamond), and four kids: Octavia Evans, Gauvauen Evans, Heidie Workneh, and Shadé Evans.


== Biography ==
While appearing in many Wu-related events, Silkski made appearances on Vh1 “Inside out, ODB on Parole”; “The Disciples Of The 36 Chambers” (DVD) concert from ODB’s last major Wutang concert July 17, 2004, before ODB's death; “Rock the Bells” movie documentary of the same concert now on DVD; The Wu-Tang Story, and documentary Dirty, One Word Can Change The World; and BET’s “Access Granted” with Ghostface and RZA from Ghostface featuring Missy Elliott “Tush” video. Silkski featured on albums, done out of the United States, such as Neplatna Identita Hodne Tvari / Many Faces; 10th Anniversary (CD Collector); and Russia Vs USA “Spy Games” Wu Edition, Compiled By WTCF.
In 1995, Silkski performed and produced the song “Techno Boy” for the movie score and soundtrack of the film Copycat. The film grossed $32,051,917 in the United States, and £2,023,443 in the UK.
In 1996, Silkski produced the song "Pimp'n Ain't EZ" for the movie and soundtrack of the 1996 animated feature film Beavis and Butt-head Do America, which grossed $20.11 million in its opening weekend, and grossed over $127,118,386 in North American box office sales. Silkski also produced songs that went over platinum on the Bloods & Crips "Bangin' on Wax” albums, as well as an album for Ice-T that went gold.Silkski family is well connected into the music industry, but that didn't give him his start in the industry. “She (Silkski’s mom) tried to keep me in the nice area”, said Silkski, “but I went the other way.””
As a child Silkski cut school and sneak into the movies in Time Square on 42nd street or Broadway; jump on back of moving commercial trucks to get a tow home; hop the train; and would often Hang ten on the subways that went over 100 miles an hour between stops. On the A train express that went non-stop from 59th Street in mid-town Manhattan to 125th Street and Broadway in Harlem; he would hang off the back of the train on the last car for a thrill ride, holding on to nothing but the door knob with his feet barely touching the platform. With his stunts and rebelliousness, it led to one of the most defining moments in Silkski’s life; his mother turned him over to the state. His mother put him in a group home in Staten Island (Mount Lorreto) “Mission of the Immaculate Virgin”. Eventually, Silkski left the group home and moved in with his cousin who lived in the roughest area of Jamaica Queens. While in Jamaica Queens, Silkski along with others contributed to the negativity of Queens inner city streets. Although he lived in a grimey area, he stood out with his extreme tagging graffiti techniques and style of dancing, which led him to be nicknamed "Kid Boogie". During Silkski's adolescence and preteen years, he was known as the kid with the sleepy eyes. People around him would call him sleepy because his eyes use to droop down or appear as if he was high or falling asleep. But at the age of 12 he decided that he wanted a nickname that sounded cool or slick. He chose the name Silk because older people use to say that he was smooth as silk; because he had the wavy hair, smooth talk, and swagger with the way he dressed. Although he liked the name Slick, he decided to go with Silk because it was cool, sounded slick, and at the time was original. During the early stages of hip hop; b-boys, emcees, d-jays and graffiti artist were giving themselves nicknames with a common tag at the end; which was a letter of the alphabet or something that gave that individual a swagger that represented a form of expression, a character, or alto ego of themselves. At that time, growing up, he would frequently wear ski jackets, ski hats, beanies, and ski goggles, because of the cold weather in New York, which in turn contributed to his persona and ultimately became a part of his name. He put the two words together “Silk and Ski”, and that is what formed the name Silkski.(https://m.imdb.com/name/nm3006221/bio/?ref_=nm_ov_bio_sm).

Aside from living in Staten Island and Queens, Silkski lived in Manhattan, Brooklyn, and Harlem. While in Harlem, Silkski connected with B-boy dancer Larry Love of the Zulu Nation who was famous in Harlem for his unique dance known as the Float. As a B-boy, Silkski became known for his unique electric boogie style where he would vibrate his hands, legs, and body. Before Silkski connected with Larry Love, he changed his dance name from "Kid Boogie" to "Gangsta Boogie". Together, Silkski and Larry Love would battle dance different crews throughout the Burroughs of New York.
Larry Parker (Larry Love), known for the song "Larry's Dance Theme, by Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five connected Silkski with the owner of Harlem World. At Harlem World, Silkski met Kurtis Blow. One day while Silski practiced his dance moves, Kurtis Blow went into the club to set up for a show. Silkski asked Kurtis Blow to watch him dance; and that same night, he was on stage dancing in the show.
Although Silkski lived in New York, he also had family on the west coast in Los Angeles, California. He would travel back and forth, bringing and taking new hip hop trends with him.
In Los Angeles, his good friend and cousin, Dougie D, reunited Silkski with Kurtis Blow, which led Kurtis to take Silkski on a forty-city European tour with him. After the tour, Silkski continued to work with Kurtis Blow for a number of years. He danced as a member of his crew, appeared in music videos, was a dee jay at major events, and worked behind the scenes as Kurtis Blow’s producer.

Later in California, Silkski joined Ice-T’s rap group Rhyme Syndicate.  He started as a rapper producing his own music, but his beats were considered so good that many artists and record labels wanted him to produce their tracks. He produced songs for the Bloods and Crips’ albums, produced songs for Geffen Records, Def Jam Recordings, PolyGram, Milan Records and was signed to Death Row Records under Char Jones as a producer. While at Death Row Records, at Can-Am Studios in Tarzana, California, he worked with Tupac Shakur, Snoop Dogg, The Lady of Rage, Kurupt and Daz Dillinger from Tha Dogg Pound, and many others until Tupac Shakur’s untimely passing (https://m.imdb.com/name/nm3006221/bio/?ref_=nm_ov_bio_sm).


== Discography ==


=== Film ===
Rock the Bells (2006) Denis Hennelly, Casey Suchan
Disciples Of The 36 Chambers (2004) Wu-Tang Clan
“Gold Diggin' For Love of Money” A Documentary Film (2009) Brass Ring Enterprises


=== Television ===
Howard Stern Show (2003) Howard Stern
Upside Down TV (2003) Johnny Neurotic and Bridget "the Midget" Powerz
The Roof T.V. (2003) (Telemundo)
Access Granted "Tush" video Ghostface and Missy Elliott (2004) BET
Inside out, ODB on Parole (2004) VH1


=== Music ===


=== Albums and singles ===


== References ==


== External links ==

wutangclan.comMichele Andrea Sherman (born March 23, 1987), better known by her stage name Siya, is an American rapper. In 2012, she signed with Tank's R&B Money label imprint. She starred in the Oxygen reality TV series Sisterhood of Hip Hop. Siya has collaborated with artists such as Chris Brown, Sage the Gemini and Kirko Bangz. Siya has performed alongside artists such as Wyclef Jean at the world famous B.B. Kings, as well as opened up for Fat Joe and Fabolous during a concert at Nassau Coliseum in Long Island, New York.  Currently starring in the BET Plus show Angel.


== Early life ==
Siya was born in Barstow, California to an African American father and a Puerto Rican mother, and has three sisters. Due to her mother's drug abuse and her incarcerated father, Siya was sent to live with her grandmother who raised her in the Eleanor Roosevelt housing projects in Bedford–Stuyvesant, Brooklyn. Siya began rapping at the age of seven and entered into the music industry at the age of 12. Siya's childhood influence was the rap group called Bone Thugs-n-Harmony. She states : "What I loved about them was how melodic their music was and that they tried different shit."


== Musical career ==
Music became an outlet for Siya to comprehend and deal with the things she was exposed to and was feeling. After moving to Atlanta to pursue her music career in her mid 20s she built a rep and fan base for herself and caught the attention of well known artists and major labels. Siya faced a lot of obstacles throughout her early time in the industry due to her being one of the first openly gay female rappers. While some people in the industry were afraid of how an openly gay female rapper would fit into the genre, Siya remained determined and refused to compromise who she was and stayed true to her own voice and style.R&B legend Tank soon found her and directly messaged Siya on Twitter and from there she was signed to Tank's label R&B Money LLC. Siya released her singles : "I'm Gone", "Smoke Drink", and mixtape Elevator Dreams in 2011.
Siya released her singles "One Hunnid" and "Real MVP" in 2014. She released a mixtape titled Better Late Than Never, and What Never Happened  in 2015. She went on to release her debut studio album SIYAvsSIYA, on December 9, 2016. The album included collaborations with artists such as Ashley Rose, Jake&Papa, Lyric Wright and Kreesha Turner with the debut single being "New York."
On February 6, 2017, Siya released a song titled "Front Door", in promotion for her six song extended play (EP), Commitment. The EP was released on February 10, 2017, under Tank's label imprint, R&B Money LLC. The EP features the single "Don't You (Say Yes)" featuring Tank. In 2017 she released "Houston Girls" ft Kirko Bangz & "Hot Girl" with her EP 383- For Roosevelt.  In 2018 she released "No Race" and "Circle Watching" as a preview for her next EP Mad Energy  expected to drop fall 2018.


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===
SIYAvsSIYA (2016)
383 – for Roosevelt (2017)
Mad Energy (2018)


=== Mixtapes ===
Elevator Music (2011)
Better Late Than Never (2015)
What Never Happened (2015)
Commitment (2017)


== Filmography ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Siya at AllMusic
Siya at IMDb
Siya discography at MusicBrainzScott Keeney (born 15 November 1983), better known by his stage name DJ Skee, is an American artist, television host, radio personality, and entrepreneur. Skee rose to fame as the first DJ to discover and play superstar artists on the radio including Kendrick Lamar, Justin Bieber, Akon, Lorde, and Lady Gaga amongst many others.


== Radio career ==
In 2015, Skee officially launched Dash Radio, which has since become world's largest all original digital radio network with investments from the likes of L.A. Reid, Adrian Peterson, Kevin Colleran, Michael Lazerow and more. Now reaching over 5 million listeners worldwide, Dash Radio powers over 75 stations completely free and curated by real DJs, artists and tastemakers with zero traditional commercials. Dash Radio has partnered with the likes of Snoop Dogg, Kylie Jenner, Odd Future, The GRAMMYs, EA Sports, T-Boz (TLC), Stevie Wonder, Wu-Tang Clan, XXL Magazine, Strange Music Inc., The Computer Game Show, multiple music festivals, and many more.


== Business career ==
Outside of his career as a DJ and TV personality, Skee is active as an entrepreneur being named one of Billboard Magazine's influential "Power Players: 30 Under 30" in the 21 August 2010 issue. Skee was also named as an honorable mention Forbes magazine's influential "Power Players: 30 Under 30" in 2012. In September 2012, Skee opened the second and flagship location of his retail store chain, Tradition, in the Beverly Center in Beverly Hills, CA.
Known as the man behind the marketing campaigns and promotions for the popular T-Mobile Sidekick in the mid-2000s, Skee has orchestrated campaigns for Daimler-Chrysler (and specifically the launch of the Chrysler 300 and Dodge Magnum in 2004), Google's Android Platform, Nike, nearly every major record label in the world, and more.  Additionally, he has written pieces for magazines such as Forbes, Billboard, RecodeIn February, 2021 DJ Skee partnered with Topps for its Project 70 baseball card collection.  As a mixtape DJ, Skee created curated playlists for each of his cards on Spotify.
On May 24, 2022, DJ Skee released the book "The Metaverse Handbook". Co-authored with Quharrison Terry with a foreword written by Paris Hilton.


== DJ career ==
As a mixtape DJ & producer, Skee has released over 100 mixtapes during his career. In 2008, Skee was nominated in eight categories, twice as much as any other DJ, at Justo's Mixtape Awards. Skee also won west coast mixtape DJ of the year at the 2013 Global Spin Awards.
Skee provided the sonic and musical identity for the 2012 Dew Tour in conjunction with NBC and Mountain Dew as well as the athletes on the tour.It was announced in 2012 that Skee would be involved with the music for Halo 4 and the Microsoft Xbox 360.On November 27, 2021, DJ Skee was the guest DJ for the NCAA football game in Michigan between The Michigan Wolverines football team and The Ohio State Buckeyes football team. Skee will return to Michigan Stadium for Michigan's game versus the Penn State Nittany Lions football team on October 15, 2022.
On February 6, 2022 DJ Skee became the first DJ to DJ live during a NASCAR race for the Busch Light Clash at The Coliseum in Los Angeles.


== Television ==
Now in its 5th season on Fuse, "Skee TV" is a one-hour original series that provides insider access to the hottest musical artists, athletes, celebrities and cultural tastemakers via exclusive interviews and live performances.On June 21, 2021, DJ Skee threw out the first pitch at Petco Park before the game between the Padres vs Dodgers.On July 15, 2021, Billboard Magazine released an article announcing that a documentary on the death of Eazy-E would be airing on MeTV with DJ Skee as one of the Executive Producers.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website 
DJ Skee discography at DiscogsKimetrius Christopher Foose (born August 4, 1998), better known by his stage name Lil Skies, is an American rapper, singer, and songwriter from Waynesboro, Pennsylvania signed to All We Got Entertainment through Atlantic Records. 
His three highest charting tracks on the Billboard Hot 100 are "I" (number 39), "Nowadays" (number 55), and "Red Roses" (number 69). His major label debut mixtape, Life of a Dark Rose, was released in 2018 and peaked at number 10 on the Billboard 200 chart. The mixtape was certified Platinum by the RIAA in 2020. He released his debut studio album, Shelby, in 2019. He followed it up by releasing his second studio album, Unbothered, in 2021.


== Early life ==
Kimetrius Christopher Foose was born August 4, 1998, in Chambersburg, Pennsylvania. He began freestyling at age three. He was introduced to music by his father, Michael Burton Jr., a hip hop artist formerly known as Dark Skies, now as BurntMan, and his mother Shelby Foose. Foose's stage name is a play on his father's. Foose and his family moved to Waynesboro, Pennsylvania when he was in third grade. When he was 11, his father was injured in a workplace chemical explosion at the Rust-Oleum plant near Williamsport, Maryland.


== Career ==


=== 2016–2018: Career beginnings and Life of a Dark Rose ===
Skies claims he used to have to sell marijuana and work "little jobs" to pay for studio time and music videos. He also worked at a McDonald's and a Japanese restaurant in his hometown. In the meantime, he would spend the summer at a relative's house; it was at that point in time he worked in collaboration with his dad on his first project released on August 14, entitled, "Birth of Skies Vol. 1". Foose and his father would write an album the following year, Father-Son Talk, discussing the recovery process. Foose graduated from Waynesboro Area Senior High School in 2016 and briefly attended Shippensburg University of Pennsylvania before dropping out to focus on his rap career. His musical inspirations are Lil Wayne, Eminem, Wiz Khalifa, The Offspring, Punchline, MxPx, Audiovent and 50 Cent.In October 2016, Foose opened for Fetty Wap at Shippensburg University and later released his first mixtape, Alone, in January 2017. In July 2017, he released two songs, "Red Roses" featuring Landon Cube and "Off The Goop" featuring Sprite Lee. He would later release other songs that year, including "Rude" and "Signs of Jealousy."Foose's repertoire of singles caught the attention of Atlantic Records who partnered with his own label, All We Got. He released his first major label mixtape, Life of a Dark Rose, on January 10, 2018. The mixtape debuted at #23 on the Billboard 200 chart and went on to peak at #10. The songs "Nowadays" and "Red Roses" (both featuring Landon Cube) debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 list at #85 and #98 respectively and have since peaked at #55 and #69 (also respectively). He also toured nationally with Lil Uzi Vert in 2017 and began his "Life of a Dark Rose" tour in 2018, but had to end the tour early due to pneumonia. On May 4, 2018, the music video for "Lust" was released, peaking at number 87 on the Billboard Hot 100 and being certified platinum by the RIAA. On May 31, he released "I Know You", featuring Yung Pinch, which peaked at 79 on the Billboard Hot 100 and is now certified gold by RIAA.


=== 2019: Shelby ===

On March 1, 2019, Lil Skies released his album Shelby, named after his mother, while simultaneously debuting the music video for lead single "I". He made a short documentary for the album on his YouTube channel by interviewing her and surprising her during it by telling her he was going to name it after her. On May 21, 2019, Lil Skies released a video for "Breathe", a song from his album, Shelby.


=== 2020–present: Unbothered ===

On March 4, 2020, Skies released the song "Havin My Way", which features close friend Lil Durk and serves as the lead single from his second studio album, Unbothered (2021). It was followed by the second single, "Riot", which was released on May 14, 2020. "On Sight", the third single, was released on November 6, 2020. On July 10, 2020, he released the track "Red & Yellow" from the Road to Fast 9 mixtape.


== Personal life ==
Foose resides in Waynesboro, Pennsylvania. In July 2019, Foose and his longtime girlfriend, Jacey Fugate, had a son.Foose cites his own song "Red Roses" as his personal favorite song, referring to the musical combination with him and Landon Cube as "epic". He cites Lil Wayne as his biggest music inspiration.Foose tries to avoid drugs as much as possible after seeing it negatively impact the lives of his old friends.In an interview, Skies claims if he was not rapping, he would like to do some "Bear Grylls type, outdoor stuff" and that his favorite hobby is fishing.


== Discography ==

Shelby (2019)
Unbothered (2021)


== References ==David Alex Villegas (born December 19, 1995), known by his stage name Skinnyfromthe9 (formerly stylized $kinnyFromThe9), is an American rapper and singer from Somerville, New Jersey. He first gained widespread attention after the release of his song "Love Blast" in late 2017. He then signed to L.A. Reid's record label, HITCO, in 2018. He released his debut mixtape, It's An Evil World, in November 2018.


== Early life ==
David Alex Villegas was born in Hialeah, Florida. He is of mixed Puerto Rican, Colombian, and Dominican descent. He grew up largely in Somerville, New Jersey, although he and his family moved around frequently. As a child, his father was imprisoned, and his mother became involved with another man. During Villegas' adolescence, his mother and stepfather engaged in scams and identity fraud until his stepfather was eventually caught and spent time in prison. Villegas also spent time living in homeless shelters and hotels as a youth. He began focusing on hip hop as a teenager after his father purchased a mic for him. He adopted the stage name, Skinnyfromthe9, because his nickname was "Skinny" and he was from area code 908 (colloquially, "the 9").


== Career ==
Skinnyfromthe9 began putting his music on SoundCloud in 2016. In 2017, he released the songs, "Family Rich" featuring Jay Critch and "Count It" featuring Stitches. In late 2017, he released the single, "Love Blast," which would go on to accumulate more than 3.5 million streams on SoundCloud. In January 2018, Skinny joined Fetty Wap on his "FMF Tour." Later that year, it was announced that he had signed to L.A. Reid's new record label, HITCO.In April 2018, he released a music video for "Love Blast" and also released the single, "Back When I Was Broke." The following month, he published music videos for "Back When I Was Broke" and "Pink Choppas." Rappers Wiz Khalifa and Russ made cameos in the former video. Later that month, Skinny also released the songs, "Space" and "I Drip."Beginning in June 2018, Skinny was supposed to join rapper, 24hrs, on his "3200 Lenox Rd." tour, but 24hrs was hospitalized in June, and the tour was canceled. In July 2018, Skinny made a cameo appearance in the video for PnB Rock's "London." The following month, he released the single, "Jump Out That," featuring PnB Rock. Later in August, Skinny was arrested on suspicion of simple assault and theft.In October 2018, while serving time in jail, he released a freestyle rap along with two more songs, "Alone" and "Songs About You." He was released from jail in November 2018. Soon after his release, he published the music video for his song, "Just Left Jail." His debut mixtape, It's An Evil World, was released on November 30, 2018, through HITCO. It featured guest appearances from Fetty Wap, PnB Rock, and Kap G. going into 2020 skinnyfromthe9 did a song with Hitta Castro that blow up called "In My Feelings2.


== Legal issues ==
Since 2014, Skinnyfromthe9 has been charged with several minor offenses such as shoplifting and reckless driving. Many of those charges were later dropped.In August 2018, Skinny, his father, his brother, and a fourth defendant were arrested and charged with kidnapping and aggravated assault in relation to an incident in Somerset County, New Jersey in which the four men were accused of luring another man into a vehicle and striking him. In September, the charges for Skinny were downgraded to luring an adult, simple assault, and theft after he took a plea deal that also allowed him to avoid prison time in exchange for a probation sentence. Skinny has maintained his innocence, claiming that the person who brought charges against him stole a chain worth $8,000.


== Discography ==


=== Mixtapes ===


=== Singles ===


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Skinnyfromthe9 on SoundCloudGeorge Carroll, better known as Slaine, is an American rapper and actor. Born in Boston, Massachusetts, where he spent his childhood and teenage years, Carroll moved to New York City in the mid-1990s, where he adopted the moniker of Slaine and started to rap and record hip-hop. In the early 2000s, Carroll became a growing figure in the Boston hip-hop scene, releasing several mixtapes, and the LP Stereotypez (2007) with his group Special Teamz. Later, A Brand You Can Trust (2009) was released, by the rap supergroup La Coka Nostra, where Carroll is joined by Ill Bill, and House of Pain. Carroll’s first solo album A World With No Skies 2.0. (2011) peaked at 33 on the Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums it, 22 on the Top Rap Albums, 29 on US Independent Albums, and 4 on Top Heatseekers.
Carroll’s subsequent albums with La Coka Nostra were Masters of the Dark Arts (2012) and To Thine Own Self Be True (2016). On his own he followed up with The Boston Project (2013), The King of Everything Else (2014), Anti-Hero (2017), One Day (2019), and The Things We Can't Forgive (2021).
While rising on the hip-hop scene, Carroll became an actor. For Ben Affleck's directorial film debut, Gone Baby Gone (2007), he thought Carroll had the right look for a part and auditioned him successfully. However before Carroll was completely onboard, Affleck had to do some additional convincing, since the producers were reluctant to hire a first time actor. A few years later, Affleck rehired Carroll for the movie The Town (2010). Together with the rest of the cast, they won Best ensemble cast at the 2010 National Board of Review, and Washington DC Area Film Critics Association Awards. Carroll continued acting in motion pictures with roles in Killing Them Softly (2012), Girl House (2014), Central Intelligence (2016), Wheelman (2017), etc.


== Early life ==
George Carroll was born in the Boston, Massachusetts. His family often moved between the neighborhoods of South Boston, Dorchester, and Roslindale. He started writing rap lyrics in 1986, being influenced by the Beastie Boys, LL Cool J, and Kool Moe Dee. However, his first goal was to become a filmmaker. Carroll said that he moved to New York City in 1996. During this time he studied film at the School of Visual Arts in Manhattan, but was let go after getting into an altercation with a staff member. Carroll turned his direction toward hip-hop performing his raps at open-mike sessions and street corners. Eventually while recording a demo in the studio of the rap group Lordz of Brooklyn, Carroll said that member Kaves nicknamed him Slaine after an Irish comic book character. Afterward, Carroll lived between Boston and New-York.


== Career ==


=== 2004 to 2011: rise to prominence and breakthrough ===
In late 2004, the creation of the rap supergroup La Coka Nostra started when hip-hop artist Danny Boy O'Connor was mentoring two up and coming artists which included Carroll. O'Connor brought them to meet his former DJ Leor Diamant (DJ Lethal) from his previous group House of Pain. They decided to make a group, however O'Connor felt that there was a void and asked experienced rapper William Braunstein (Ill Bill) to join. The group's name came about, when O'Connor teased other members after they had a night out. The group started releasing music on MySpace, and went viral. Eventually, another former House of Pain member Erik Schrody (Everlast) showed interest to join the group. By 2006, the group consisted of O'Connor, Carroll, Diamant, Braunstein, and Schrody (who left some time after the first album was released).During this time, Carroll was getting noticed as a talented rapper in the Boston underground hip-hop scene. He was part of a group named Special Teamz alongside artists Jaysaun and Ed O.G. In a 2005 Boston Globe article, he is described as “one of the city’s most talented hip-hop artist, who exudes mass appeal”.In 2005, he released the mixtape The White Man Is the Devil, Vol. 1.In 2007, Carroll had his first acting role in Ben Affleck's Gone Baby Gone. Reading a newspaper article about his music triggered Affleck's initial interest in casting him. At 9 am the next day, Affleck started to phone Carroll, who had gone to bed two hours earlier and missed all his calls. Carroll said "My picture was in the Boston Herald talking about what I was doing with my music. I woke up one afternoon, and I had 66 missed phone calls. They called me in to do an audition -- turned out I had to do five auditions." Originally Carroll was sought after for the role of Cheese, but Affleck changed his mind and wanted him for the bigger part of the gangster Bubba Rogowski. Carroll explained "I thought I wasn't going to get (the role) because they took so long to get back to me, but it turns out Ben was just convincing the studio to take a chance on me despite my lack of acting experience. I was in L.A. recording with La Coka Nostra when I got the call and was obviously ecstatic." Affleck explained his reasoning by saying “it’s really great to hire people with whom an audience isn’t overly familiar, because audiences have developed expectations and kind of anticipate what an actor might do if they’ve seen them a bunch". Released on October 19, 2007, the film grossed $20.3 million in the U.S. and Canada and $14.3 million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $34.6 million against its $19 million budget.Also that year, Carroll with Special Teamz released the album Stereotypez.In 2009, La Coka Nostra released A Brand You Can Trust was released on July 14, 2009, on Suburban Noize Records. It sold over 500,000 units. AllMusic gave four out of five stars. Andrew Kameka of HipHopDX wrote that "the album is a mostly solid effort and exactly what someone would expect from a supergroup of like-minded members known for high-energy music". Adam Kennedy of the BBC while praising some the moments of the album said "it’s a tantalising parting taste of potential capabilities". Steve Juon of RapReviews gave it a seven out of ten saying "there's definitely brutal beauty in the worlds that have collided on La Coka Nostra's "A Brand You Can Trust"". Thomas Quinlan of Exclaim! said "La Coka Nostra are an interesting collection of collaborators that live up to the hype".In 2010, Carroll reunited with director Affleck for the film The Town. The film is about a gang of bank robbers which includes Carroll, Affleck, Jeremy Renner, and Owen Burke. For their performances they won Best ensemble cast at the 2010 National Board of Review, and Washington DC Area Film Critics Association Awards. The film took #1 at the box office during its opening weekend, taking in $23.8 million. The Town grossed $92.1 million in the United States and Canada with an additional $61.8 million in other territories for a total of $154 million worldwide on a production budget of $37 million.In 2011, Carroll released his first solo album A World With No Skies 2.0. The addition of the "2.0" is due to the fact that an earlier version of the album had been leaked online. On the Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums it peaked at 33, on Top Rap Albums at 22, on US Independent Albums at 29, and on Top Heatseekers at 4. David Jeffries of AllMusic gave it three and a half stars out of five, saying ''this is a solid outing from the Irish-American MC''. Steve Juon of Rapreviews gave it eight out of ten and said "It's that self-effacing humor and penchant for punchlines that keep Slaine's album from going so dark". Luke Gibson of HipHopDX gave it four out of five stars, praised it to be Carroll best lyrical effort to date, and said ''a national album that portrays him as more than just Boston’s boy, but a voice that resonates with struggle, perseverance and the tender balance between good and evil everywhere''. For his music accomplishments, Carroll won "Hip Hop Artist Of The Year" at the Boston Music Awards.That same year on television, on 11 February, Carroll acted in Razer the ninth instalment of the first season of The Cape. On 4 October, he played a part in Missing an episode of Body of Proof.


=== 2012 to present day: subsequent success ===
In 2012, La Coka Nostra released their second album, Masters of the Dark Arts. It reached 176 on Billboard Top Current Albums, 40 on Independent Albums, and 31 on Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums. Adam Fleischer of XXL magazine noted that "La Coka Nostra remain decidedly true to their core with their new album" and "that they are indeed masters of the dark arts". HipHopDX gave the album a positive review and noted that the album was a "sinister, happily violent detour from the pop-centric". Peter Marrack of Exclaim! also gave the album a positive review and noted that the album was "more or less a one-way ticket to hell". Nathan G. O'Brien of Scene Point Blank gave it four out five star and said "with Master of the Dark Arts La Coka Nostra’s pluperfect union of bombastic boom-bap, record scratching, and realism-based hardcore rhyming". Also that year, Carroll acted in Andrew Dominik's Killing Them Softly.In 2013, Carroll released his second solo album The Boston Project. Where all the songs have featured guest from the Boston hip hop local scenes, including the likes of Esoteric, Ed O.G., Millyz, etc. Of this record Carroll explained his intent: “I wanted to create a record that highlights what this city has to offer musically and show how diverse the talent is. This record embodies something much larger than just a Slaine record.” On the Top Rap Albums it peaked at the Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums it peaked at 40, and on Top Heatseekers at 10. Matt Jost of Rapreview gave it a seven point five out of ten saying: "Slaine makes for a formidable tour guide, relying on his own experience but also knowing that, as he puts it at one point, “I speak for more of us.”" Andres Tardio of HipHopDx gave it three point five stars out of five and stated that. "The Boston Project is a solid album with versatility that does what Slaine set out to do: represent Boston Hip Hop in a positive light." Martìn Cabellero of The Boston Globe liked the album calling it ambitious and a strong showing of his talent.In 2014, Carroll released his third album The King of Everything Else. On the Billboard 200 it peaked at 189, Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums at 26, on Top Rap Albums at 15, on US Independent Albums at 30, and on Top Heatseekers at 4.Acting credits for that year are the gangster film By the Gun, and Trevor Matthews's horror film Girl House, where he plays the main antagonist. The second is described as a good slasher film with good performances. Mike Wilson of Bloody Disgusting said "Slaine hits the right notes when it comes to expressions and emotions, while evoking a bit of sympathy for the sob". Scott Hallam of Dread Central praised Carroll "one of the true strengths of the film is Slaine’s portrayal of the killer, Loverboy".In 2016, La Coka Nostra released To Thine Own Self Be True. The album reached 38 on the Billboard Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums. Steve Juon of RapReviews gave eight point five out of ten and wrote "for a blissful 45 minutes it's an uncut dose of that nostalgia straight through the ear canals to the dopamine centers of my brain". Also that year, Carroll acted in Rawson Marshall Thurber's Central Intelligence, John Swab's Let Me Make You a Martyr, and Dead Draw.In 2017, Carroll and rapper Termanology, as a duo called Slaine Vs Termanology, released the album Anti-Hero.Also. that year,  he was in the Netflix movie Wheelman.In 2019, he acted in John Swab's Run with the Hunted. That year he also released the album One Day.
In 2021, Carroll acted in the suspense film Ida Red by John Swab. That year he also released the album The Things We Can't Forgive.
In 2022, Carroll acted in It Snows All the Time.In 2023, Carroll acted in two John Swab's films Little Dixie, and One Day as Lion.


== Personal ==
Carroll is a father with one son.In 2022, in addition to his music and acting career, Carroll opened up Charles River Recovery with a group of professionals whose mission is to give treatment to people who suffer from addiction. Carroll found sobriety in March 2014 after a long battle with alcoholism and addiction and became increasingly involved in helping others after losing his best friend to an overdose. Charles River Recovery is a 110 bed inpatient medical detox and clinical stabilization facility in the Boston area.


== Discography ==


== Filmography ==
Gone Baby Gone (2007)
The Town (2010)
Killing Them Softly (2012)
By the Gun (2014)
Girl House (2014)
Central Intelligence (2016)
Let Me Make You a Martyr (2016)
Dead Draw (2016)
Wheelman (2017)
Run with the Hunted (2019)
Ida Red (2021)
It Snows All the Time (2022)
Little Dixie (2023)
One Day as Lion  (2023)


== Accolades ==
2010 - Winner - Best Ensemble - shared with the rest of the cast of The Town - National Board of Review
2010 - Winner - Best Ensemble - shared with the rest of the cast of The Town - Washington DC Area Film Critics Association Awards
2011 - Winner - "Hip Hop Artist Of The Year" - Boston Music Awards


== References ==


== External links ==
Slaine at IMDb
Slaine at MySpace
Slaine on Instagram
Slaine on Facebook
Slaine's channel on YouTube
Slaine on TwitterBurton Rashad "Ringo" Smith (born 
September 28, 1972) is an American hip hop and R&B record producer. He was born in England and raised in Brooklyn, New York City, United States, in a Jamaican and Haitian family. Rashad grew up alongside notable hip hop artists such as Mos Def, Busta Rhymes, Q-Tip, among others.
At the age of 19, he provided beats to Main Source, Eric B and Rakim and A Tribe Called Quest. He proceeded further into the music business by working directly with Andre Harrell at the newly minted Uptown Records. While at Uptown, Rashad met session keyboardist Avon Marshell with whom he formed Tumblin Dice. The duo went on to produce for Uptown's biggest artist's, including Mary J. Blige and Jodeci's   early albums. Tumblin Dice would go on to become resident producers for the recently formed Bad Boy Records, after Sean "Puffy" Combs requested Rashad join his production team The Hitmen. During this time, Rashad produced chart topping hits. Rashad continued his chart topping success after composing Busta Rhymes first hit single, "Woo Hah!! Got You All in Check". Rashad has composed tracks for Aaliyah, Fat Joe, MC Lyte, Lil' Kim, Foxy Brown, Das EFX, Slick Rick, En Vogue, 50 Cent, Erykah Badu, Nicki Minaj, and DJ Khaled and others.
He is the cousin of producer and Main Source member K-Cut.


== Production credits ==
1994: Craig Mack – "Making Moves With Puff"
1995 - The Notorious B.I.G. - "One More Chance / Stay With Me"
1995: Total – "Can't You See"
1995: LL Cool J – "Doin' It"
1995: LL Cool J – "Loungin"
1996: Keith Sweat - "Twisted"
1996: MC Lyte – "Cold Rock A Party"
1996: Busta Rhymes – "Woo-Hah!! Got You All in Check"
1996: Nas feat. Lauryn Hill – "If I Ruled the World (Imagine That)" (Produced By Rashad Smith & Trackmasters)
1996: A Tribe Called Quest – "The Hop"
1996: LL Cool J – "Ain't Nobody"
1996: Lil Kim – "Not Tonight"
1996: The Nutty Professor Soundtrack - "Doin It Again"
1996: Aaliyah - "Choosey Lover (Old School/New School)"
1996: Space Jam (album)
1996: Beavis and Butt-Head Do America: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack
1997: Puff Daddy – "Young G's"
1997: Scout's Honor... By Way of Blood (majority of album)
1997: Seal – "Fly Like An Eagle"
1997: Lil Kim and Foxy Brown - "Enjoy yourself"
1997: 98° - "I Wanna Love You
1997: LSG - "Curious"
1998: Big Pun - "How We Roll '98"
1998: Das EFX – "Set It Off", "Rap Scholar"
1999: Slick Rick – "Trapped In Me"
2000: 50 Cent feat. Destiny’s Child – "Thug Love"
2003: Erykah Badu – Worldwide Underground (album)
2003: Violator feat. A Tribe Called Quest & Erykah Badu – "I C U (Doin' It)"
2009: Ghostface Killah – "Baby" (Produced by Austin "Watts" Garrick & Rashad Smith)
2016: Miles Davis - "Everything's Beautiful"
2018: Nicki Minaj - "Barbie Dreams"
2019: DJ Khaled - "You Stay"
2020: Slingbaum - Slingbaum One


== Writing credits ==
1994: Mary J Blige - "My Life"
1994: Miss Jones - "Don't Front"
1994: Craig Mack - "Making moves with Puff"
1995: The Notorious B.I.G - "One More Chance"
1995: LL Cool J - "God Bless"
1995: The Notorious B.I.G - "I'm Jus' Playin"
1996: Aaliyah - "Choosey Lover (Old School/New School)"
1996: Mc Lyte - "Bad As I Wanna Be"
1996: LL Cool J - "Aint Nobody"
1996: LL Cool J - "Loungin (Who Do Ya Luv)''
1996: Busta Rhymes - "Flipmode Remixes"
1996: Seal - "Fly Like An Eagle"
1996: Ladea! - "Party 2 Nite"
1996: 702 - "Steelo"
1996: LL Cool J - " Summer Luv"
1996: Beavis and Butt-Head Do America -"Aint Nobody"
1996: LL Cool J - "Doin It"
1996: Total - "Do You Know"
1996: The Nutty Professor Soundtrack - "Doin It Again"
1996: Space Jam - "Upside Down"
1996: A Tribe Called Quest - "Beats,Rhymes And Life"
1996: Nas - "If I Ruled The World (Imagine That)"
1997: How To Be A Player Soundtrack - "Young Casanovas"
1997: DJ Skribble- "Everybody Come on"
1997: Lil Kim - "Not Tonight"
1997: Billy Lawrence -"Up and Down"
1997: Puff Daddy & The Family - "No Way Out"
1997: MC Lyte - " Druglord Superstar"
1997: Rampage feat. Billy Lawrence - " Take it To The Streets"
1997: LSG - " Curious"
1997: Busta Rhymes - "When Disaster Strikes"
1997: Reign - "Touch And Play"
1997: 98 Degrees - "I wanna Love you"
1997: Busta Rhymes- "You Won't Tell,I Won't Tell''
1997: Shades - "What Would You Do"
1997: Rampage - "Take It To The Streets"
1997: Myron - "Destiny"
1998: YoYo - "Do You Wanna Ride"
1998: YoYo fet. Gerald Levert - " Iz It Still All Good?"
1998: Miss Jones - "Wont Stop"
1998: Das EFX - "Set It Off"
1998: Das EFX - "Rap Scholar"
1998: Fat Joe - "Don Cartagena"
1998: Hav Plenty Soundtrack - " I wanna Be Where You Are"
1998: Busta Rhymes - "Rhymes Galore"
1998: Yo Yo feat. Kelly Price - "Do You wanna Ride"
1999: Sole - "Accurate Math"
1999: Slick Rick -"Trapped in Me"
1999: 50 Cent - "Thug Love"
1999: 50 Cent feat. Destiny's Child - "Thug Love"
2000: Carl Thomas - "Supastar"
2001: Big Pun - "How We Roll '98"
2003: Violator feat. A Tribe Called Quest & Erykah Badu - "I C U (Doin' It)"
2003: Big Gipp - "History Mystery"
2003: Erykah Badu - "I Want You"
2009: Ghostface Killah - "Baby"
2016: Miles Davis & Robert Glasper - "They Can't Hold me Down"
2018: Nicki Minaj - "Barbie Dreams"
2019: Dj Khaled - "You Stay"
2020: Eminem - "Yah Yah"
2020: Slingbaum - "Slingbuam One"


== Remixes ==
1994: Mary J. Blige "Be Happy (Bad Boy Butter Mix)"
1994: Miss Jones - "Don't Front (The Remix)"
1995: Mary J. Blige "Be Happy (Puffy Remix)"
1996: 702 - "Steelo (Remix)"
1996: Space Jam - "Thats The Way (I Like It)"
1996: LL Cool J - "Doin' It (Main Remix)"
1996: Ladae! - "Party 2 Nite (On Line Street Flava)"
1996: Keith Sweat - "Twisted"
1996: Mc Lyte - "Cold Rock a Party (Bad Boy Remix)"
1996: Busta Rhymes feat. ODB - "Woo-Hah!! Got You All In Check (The World Wide Remix)"
1996: Keith Sweat - "Twisted (Tumblin Dice Street Mix)"
1997: Reign - "Touch And Play (Remix)"
1997: Lil Kim feat. Missy Elliot, DaBrat, Left Eye and Angie Martinez  - "Not Tonight"
1997: En Vouge - "Whatever (Tumblin Dice Radio Remix)"
1997: Myron - "Destiny (Remix) "
1998: Busta Rhymes - "Dangerous (The Soul Society Remix)"
1998: Masayo Queen - "Take Me To Higher (Tumblin Dice Remix)
2002: Damage feat. Rampage & Smash Task - "Diamonds & Roses"
2008: Erykah Badu - "Real Thang"


== Tours ==
2003: Frustrated Artist Tour
2004: Worldwide Underground Tour
2005: Sugar Water Festival
2006: Summer Tour
2007: Dave Chappelle Block Party Tour
2007: Hip Hop Honors Tour
2008: The Vortex World Tour
2009: Jam Tour
2010: Out My Mind,Just in Time


== Notable DJ gigs ==
2006: SXSW
2007: Rock The Bells
2007: Lacoste New York Fashion Week
2009: New Orleans Jazz Festival
2013: Governors Ball
2013: Broccoli City Festival
2017: Mountreux Jazz Festival
2018: Bless You Bruja! Another Badu Birthday
2019: Worldwide Festival Sete
2020: Rashad Smith Presents: Passport (Online)


== References ==Willard Carroll  Smith II (born September 25, 1968) is an American actor, rapper and film producer. He has received multiple accolades, including an Academy Award, a BAFTA Award, and four Grammy Awards. As of 2023, his films have grossed over $9.3 billion globally, making him one of Hollywood's most bankable stars.Smith began his acting career starring as a fictionalized version of himself on the NBC sitcom The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air (1990–1996). He first gained recognition as part of a hip hop duo with DJ Jazzy Jeff, with whom he released five studio albums and the US Billboard Hot 100 top 20 singles "Parents Just Don't Understand", "A Nightmare on My Street", "Summertime", "Ring My Bell", and "Boom! Shake the Room" from 1984 to 1994. He released the solo albums Big Willie Style (1997), Willennium (1999), Born to Reign (2002), and Lost and Found (2005), which contained the US number-one singles "Gettin' Jiggy wit It" and "Wild Wild West". He has received four Grammy Awards for his rap performances.Smith achieved wider fame as a leading man for the action film Bad Boys (1995) and the science fiction comedy Men in Black (1997); he later reprised his role in several sequels. After starring in the thrillers Independence Day (1996) and Enemy of the State (1998), he received Academy Award for Best Actor nominations for his portrayal as Muhammad Ali in Ali (2001), and as Chris Gardner in The Pursuit of Happyness (2006). His other commercially successful films include I, Robot (2004), Shark Tale (2004), Hitch (2005), I Am Legend (2007), Hancock (2008), Seven Pounds (2008), Suicide Squad (2016) and Aladdin (2019).For his portrayal of Richard Williams in the biographical sports drama King Richard (2021), Smith won the Academy Award for Best Actor. At the 2022 ceremony, shortly before winning, Smith faced backlash for slapping presenter Chris Rock after Rock made an unscripted joke referencing Smith's wife, Jada Pinkett Smith. Smith subsequently resigned from the Academy and was banned from attending all their events for ten years.


== Early life ==
Willard Carroll Smith II was born on September 25, 1968, in Philadelphia, to Caroline (née Bright), a school board administrator, and Willard Carroll Smith Sr., a US Air Force veteran and refrigeration engineer. His mother graduated from Carnegie Mellon University.He grew up in West Philadelphia's Wynnefield neighborhood and was raised Baptist. He has an elder sister named Pamela and two younger siblings, twins Harry and Ellen. He attended Our Lady of Lourdes, a private Catholic elementary school in Philadelphia, and Overbrook High School. His parents separated when he was 13 and divorced around the year 2000.Smith began rapping at age 12. When his grandmother found a notebook of his lyrics, which he described as containing "all [his] little curse words", she wrote him a note on a page in the book: "Dear Willard, truly intelligent people do not have to use words like this to express themselves. Please show the world that you're as smart as we think you are". Smith said that this influenced his decision not to use profanity in his music.


== Career ==


=== 1985–1992: DJ Jazzy Jeff & the Fresh Prince ===
Smith started as the MC of the hip-hop duo DJ Jazzy Jeff & the Fresh Prince, with his childhood friend Jeffrey "DJ Jazzy Jeff" Townes as turntablist and producer. Townes and Smith were introduced to each other by chance in 1985, as Townes was performing at a house party only a few doors down from Smith's residence, and he was missing his hype man. Smith decided to fill in. They both felt strong chemistry, and Townes was upset when his hype man finally made it to the party.Soon after, the two decided to collaborate. Smith enlisted a friend to join as the beatboxer of the group, Clarence Holmes aka Ready Rock C, making them a trio. Philadelphia-based Word Records released their first single in 1986 when A&R man Paul Oakenfold introduced them to Champion Records with their single "Girls Ain't Nothing but Trouble," a tale of funny misadventures that landed Smith and his former DJ and rap partner Mark Forrest (Lord Supreme) in trouble. The song sampled the theme song of "I Dream of Jeannie." Smith became known for light-hearted story-telling raps and capable, though profanity-free, "battle" rhymes. The single became a hit a month before Smith graduated from high school.Based on this success, the duo were brought to the attention of Jive Records and Russell Simmons. The duo's first album, Rock the House, which was first released on Word Up in 1986 debuted on Jive in March 1987. The group received the first Grammy Award for Best Rap Performance in 1989 for "Parents Just Don't Understand" (1988), though their most successful single was "Summertime" (1991), which earned the group their second Grammy and peaked at number 4 on the Billboard Hot 100. Smith and Townes are still friends and claim that they never split up, having made songs under Smith's solo performer credit.Smith spent money freely around 1988 and 1989 and underpaid his income taxes. The Internal Revenue Service eventually assessed a $2.8 million tax debt against Smith, took many of his possessions, and garnished his income. Smith was struggling financially in 1990 when the NBC television network signed him to a contract and built a sitcom, The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air, around him. The show was successful and began his acting career. Smith set for himself the goal of becoming "the biggest movie star in the world", studying box office successes' common characteristics. In 1989, Smith was arrested in relation to an alleged assault on his record promoter, William Hendricks; the charges were later dismissed.


=== 1993–1997: Solo music and film breakthrough ===
Smith's first major roles were in the drama Six Degrees of Separation (1993) and the action film Bad Boys (1995) in which he starred opposite Martin Lawrence. The latter film was commercially successful, grossing $141.4 million worldwide. However, critical reception was generally mixed. In 1996, Smith starred as part of an ensemble cast in Roland Emmerich's Independence Day. The film was a massive blockbuster, becoming the second highest-grossing film in history at the time and establishing Smith as a prime box office draw.In the summer of 1997, he starred alongside Tommy Lee Jones in the hit Men in Black, playing Agent J. The film was released on July 2 by Columbia Pictures and grossed over $589.3 million worldwide against a $90 million budget, becoming the year's third highest-grossing film, with an estimated 54,616,700 tickets sold in the US. It received positive reviews, with critics praising its humor, as well as Jones's and Smith's performances.
During the summer of 1997, Smith also began his solo music career with the release of "Men in Black", the theme song for the film, which topped singles charts in several regions across the world, including the UK. "Men in Black" (and second single "Just Cruisin' ") was later included on Smith's debut solo album Big Willie Style, which reached the top ten of the US Billboard 200 and was certified nine times platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). The third single from the album, "Gettin' Jiggy wit It", became Smith's first Billboard Hot 100 number one when it was released in 1998.


=== 1998–2007: Leading man status ===
In 1998, Smith starred with Gene Hackman in Enemy of the State. The following year he turned down the role of Neo in The Matrix in favor of Wild Wild West (1999). Despite the disappointment of Wild Wild West, Smith said that he has no regrets about his decision, asserting that Keanu Reeves's performance as Neo was superior to what Smith himself would have achieved, although in interviews subsequent to the release of Wild Wild West he said that he "made a mistake on Wild Wild West. That could have been better."Smith's second album was again supported by the release of a film theme song as the lead single: "Wild Wild West", featuring Dru Hill and Kool Moe Dee, topped the Billboard Hot 100 and was certified gold by the RIAA. The album in question, Willennium, reached number five on the Billboard 200 and was certified double platinum by the RIAA. "Will 2K", the second single from the album, reached number 25 on the Billboard Hot 100. Before the end of 1999, a video album was released featuring Smith's seven music videos released to date, which reached number 25 on the UK Music Video Chart. The same year, he was also featured on The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air co-star Tatyana Ali's single "Boy You Knock Me Out", which reached number three on the UK Singles Chart and topped the UK R&B Singles Chart.Smith portrayed heavyweight boxer Muhammad Ali in the 2001 biopic Ali. For his performance he was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actor, and the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Drama. In 2002, following a four-year musical hiatus, Smith returned with his third album Born to Reign, which reached number 13 on the Billboard 200 and was certified gold by the RIAA. The album's lead single was the theme song from Smith's film Men in Black II, called "Black Suits Comin' (Nod Ya Head)", which reached number three on the UK Singles Chart. Later in the year, Smith's first compilation album Greatest Hits was released, featuring songs from his three solo albums as well as those produced with DJ Jazzy Jeff.2003 saw Smith return for Bad Boys II, the sequel to the 1995 film Bad Boys; the film follows detectives Burnett and Lowrey investigating the flow of ecstasy into Miami. Despite receiving generally negative reviews, the film was a box-office success, grossing $270 million worldwide. In the following year, he starred in the science fiction film I, Robot and the animated film Shark Tale; both films were box office successes despite mixed reviews. Smith's latest album Lost and Found was released in 2005, peaking at number six on the Billboard 200. Lead single "Switch" reached the top ten of both the Billboard Hot 100 and the UK Singles Chart. In 2005, Smith was entered into the Guinness Book of World Records for attending three premieres in a 24-hour time span. Smith and his son Jaden played father and son in the 2006 biographical drama The Pursuit of Happyness. In the film Smith portrays Chris Gardner. Smith first became interested in making a film about Gardner after seeing him on 20/20 and connected with him during production. The film, along with Smith's performance, received praise.
On December 10, 2007, Smith was honored at Grauman's Chinese Theatre on Hollywood Boulevard. Smith left an imprint of his hands and feet outside the theater in front of many fans. Later that month, Smith starred in the film I Am Legend, released on December 14, 2007. Alongside marginally positive reviews, its opening was the largest ever for a film released in the United States during December. Smith himself has said that he considers the film to be "aggressively unique". A reviewer said that the film's commercial success "cemented [Smith's] standing as the number one box office draw in Hollywood." On December 1, 2008, TV Guide reported that Smith was selected as one of America's top ten most fascinating people of 2008 for a Barbara Walters ABC special that aired on December 4, 2008.


=== 2008–2019: Blockbusters and critical disappointments ===
In 2008, Smith was reported to be developing a film entitled The Last Pharaoh, in which he would be starring as Taharqa. Smith later starred in the superhero movie Hancock, which grossed $227,946,274 in the United States and Canada and had a worldwide total of $624,386,746. On August 19, 2011, it was announced that Smith returned to the studio with producer La Mar Edwards to work on his fifth studio album.Smith again reprised his role as Agent J with Men in Black 3, which opened on May 25, 2012, his first major starring role in four years. After the release of the film, Smith was content with ending his work with the franchise, saying, "I think three is enough for me. Three of anything is enough for me. We'll look at it and we'll consider it, but it feels like that it might be time to let someone else do that." Men in Black 3, released ten years after Men in Black II (2002), grossed over $624 million worldwide. Unadjusted for inflation, it is the highest-grossing film in the series.In 2013, Smith starred in After Earth with his son Jaden. The film was a disappointment at the domestic box office and was panned critically. Calling the film "the most painful failure in my career", Smith ended up taking a year and a half break as a result.
Smith starred opposite Margot Robbie in the romance drama Focus, released on February 27, 2015. He played Nicky Spurgeon, a veteran con artist who takes a young, attractive woman under his wing. Smith was set to star in the sci-fi thriller Brilliance, an adaptation of Marcus Sakey's novel of the same name scripted by Jurassic Park writer David Koepp, but he left the project to work on the Ridley Scott-produced sports drama Concussion.In Concussion, Smith played Dr. Bennet Omalu of the Brain Injury Research Institute, the first to discover chronic traumatic encephalopathy. Smith reported he had doubts about the film early in the production, saying, "some of my happiest memories are of watching my son catch and throw a football. I didn't want to be the guy who did a movie saying football could be dangerous." These views subsided when he met Omalu, whose words about American ideals resonated with Smith. Smith's performance was praised for being "sensitive [and] understated".In 2016, Smith played Deadshot in the supervillain team-up action film Suicide Squad. Smith's participation in the film meant choosing it over a role in Independence Day: Resurgence, which he said would be like "clinging and clawing backwards." While Suicide Squad was a massive financial success, earning over $700 million at the box office, the film received negative reviews from critics. Christopher Orr, film critic from The Atlantic wrote that "the latest offering from the DC Comics superhero universe may be the most disastrous yet". Later that year, Smith starred in director David Frankel's drama Collateral Beauty, playing a New York advertising executive who succumbs to a deep depression after a personal tragedy. Weeks after signing Smith onto the film, his father was diagnosed with cancer, from which he died in 2016. As part of his role required him to read about religion and the afterlife, he was brought closer to the elder Smith, calling the experience "a beautiful way to prepare for a movie and an even more majestic way to say goodbye to my father." The film marked the lowest box office opening of Will Smith's career. The film also received near universal negative reviews from film critics. Hollywood Reporter critic David Rooney criticized Smith's performance writing as "the least interesting component in a madly overqualified cast".His film Bright was distributed via Netflix on December 22, 2017. An urban fantasy, it was the most expensive film for Netflix to date. Smith collaborated with his director from Suicide Squad, David Ayer. This would also be another critical disappointment for Smith, with critics panning the movie. Richard Roeper of The Chicago Sun-Times criticized the film and Smith's performance writing, "By the time Will Smith barks [the line, "Dude, you can't go through elf town!"] with 100 percent urgency and sincerity in the mindboggling mess that is "Bright," it's clear we are watching a truly terrible, mountainous pile of genre-blending garbage."Also in 2017, Smith released the song "Get Lit" a collaboration between him and his former group mate Jazzy Jeff and launched his own YouTube channel, which as of July 2019 has over 6 million subscribers and 294 million total views.
Smith performed the official song "Live It Up" alongside American singer Nicky Jam and Kosovar singer Era Istrefi at the closing ceremony of the 2018 FIFA World Cup in Moscow, Russia. That September, Smith appeared, alongside Bad Bunny, on the Marc Anthony song "Está Rico".Smith portrayed The Genie (originally voiced by Robin Williams) in the live-action adaptation of Disney's Aladdin, directed by Guy Ritchie. He also participated in the soundtracks by recording singles: "Arabian Nights (2019)", "Friend Like Me" and "Prince Ali". The film was released on May 24, 2019. Aladdin grossed over $1 billion worldwide to become Smith's highest-grossing film, surpassing Independence Day. Smith was also featured on rapper Logic's song "Don't Be Afraid To Be Different" (2019), from his fifth studio album Confessions of a Dangerous Mind.Smith appeared as an assassin who faces off against a younger clone of himself in Ang Lee's Gemini Man, released on October 11, 2019. The film was a box office bomb and received negative reviews from critics. Variety's Peter DeBruge called the film "a high-concept misfire" and wrote: "In practice, it's been a nearly impossible project to get made, passing through the hands of countless actors and falling through multiple times because the technology wasn't there yet. At least, that's been the excuse, although judging by the finished product, it was the script that never lived up to the promise of its premise."Later that year, Smith had his second starring role in an animated film, in Spies in Disguise, opposite Tom Holland. Smith voiced Lance Sterling, a spy who teams up with the nerdy inventor who creates his gadgets (Holland). In 2020, he reteamed with Martin Lawrence for the third film in their franchise, Bad Boys for Life. In 2019, Smith invested $46 million in esports organization Gen.G with Smith's Dreamers Fund, which he co-founded with Keisuke Honda. In June 2020, it was announced that Smith would star in Emancipation, directed by Antoine Fuqua, in which he portrays Peter, a runaway slave, who outsmarts hunters and the Louisiana swamp on a journey to the Union Army.


=== 2020–present: Memoir and King Richard ===
Smith's memoir Will, which was written with Mark Manson, the author of The Subtle Art of Not Giving a F*ck, was published on November 9, 2021, and promoted with a tour. The book is a journey of self-knowledge recalling childhood traumas, his relationship with his father, and his experiences with ayahuasca. In the same year, he and his Westbrook Studios company signed a deal with National Geographic.Smith portrayed Richard Williams, father and coach of tennis players Venus and Serena Williams, in the 2021 film King Richard. For his performance, he won the Academy Award for Best Actor, Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Drama, and the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Leading Role.On February 7, 2022, National Geographic announced that Smith would star in a series titled Pole to Pole, which will stream on Disney+. The show will follow Smith and his film crew as they go on a 26,000-mile (42,000 km) trek from the South Pole to the North Pole, crossing all of Earth's biomes and spending time in communities along the way.


==== 2022 Oscars confrontation ====

During the 94th Academy Awards on March 27, 2022, Smith walked onstage and slapped presenter and comedian Chris Rock who had made a joke about his wife Jada Pinkett Smith's shaved head with a reference to the main protagonist in the film G.I. Jane. Smith then returned to his seat and yelled at Rock, twice saying "Keep my wife's name out your fucking mouth!" Pinkett Smith had been diagnosed with alopecia areata in 2018 and would later shave her head due to the condition. The Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences (AMPAS) said that Smith was asked to leave the ceremony but he refused. Later in the night, Smith was named Best Actor for King Richard and apologized to the Academy and the other nominees, but not to Rock, in his acceptance speech. Following public backlash, Smith issued a formal apology via a public Instagram post. ABC, AMPAS, and the Screen Actors Guild condemned Smith following the incident, prompting an investigation by the Academy's Board of Governors. Rock declined to press charges against Smith, according to the Los Angeles Police Department. On April 1, 2022, Smith tendered his resignation from the Academy, writing in part:

I deprived other nominees and winners of their opportunity to celebrate and be celebrated for their extraordinary work. I am heartbroken. I want to put the focus back on those who deserve attention for their achievements and allow the Academy to get back to the incredible work it does to support creativity and artistry in film. So, I am resigning from membership in the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, and will accept any further consequences the Board deems appropriate.
The AMPAS President David Rubin accepted the resignation in an official statement but said they would continue their investigation. Smith's resignation means he is no longer able to vote on Oscar nominations as a member of the Academy. Commentators have speculated that Smith's resignation from the Academy and other related fallout from the slap would damage his "family brand".On April 8, 2022, the Academy announced its decision to ban Smith from future Oscars galas and associated events for a period of 10 years. Several film projects that Smith had been involved in were put on hold as a result of the controversy. In a statement to CNN, Smith stated: "I accept and respect the Academy's decision." Smith offered an on camera apology on July 29, saying he was "deeply remorseful" for his actions.


== Personal life ==


=== Relationships and family ===
Smith married Sheree Zampino in 1992. Their son Willard Carroll "Trey" Smith III was born on November 11, 1992. The two divorced in 1995. Trey appeared in his father's music video for the 1998 single "Just the Two of Us". He also acted in two episodes of the sitcom All of Us, and has appeared on The Oprah Winfrey Show and the David Blaine: Real or Magic TV special.Smith married actress Jada Koren Pinkett on December 31, 1997. They met when Pinkett auditioned for a role as Smith's character's girlfriend in The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air. The pair produce films through their joint production company Overbrook Entertainment and Westbrook Inc. Together they have two children: Jaden Christopher Syre Smith (b. 1998), his co-star in The Pursuit of Happyness and After Earth; and Willow Camille Reign Smith (b. 2000), who appeared as his daughter in I Am Legend.
Smith and his wife Jada have expressed unconventional practices in their marriage, jokingly calling their commitment "bad marriage for life". Both he and Pinkett Smith have admitted to having extramarital relationships and believing in the freedom to pursue them. Smith has said he wanted a polyamorous relationship with actress Halle Berry and ballerina Misty Copeland but ultimately abandoned the idea after therapy.In October 2023, Pinkett Smith stated that she and Smith had been separated since 2016, though they have no intention to legally divorce.


=== Business ===
Smith and his brother Harry own Treyball Development Inc., a Beverly Hills–based company named after Trey Smith, and his family resides in Los Angeles, California. In 2018, Smith celebrated his 50th birthday by performing a bungee jump from a helicopter in the Grand Canyon. Smith was insured by Lloyd's of London for $200 million for the jump, which raised money for the charity Global Citizen.


=== Religious and political views ===
Smith was raised in a Baptist household and attended a Baptist church and Catholic school. In a 2013 interview, he said he did not identify as religious. In 2015, Smith said in an interview with The Christian Post that his Christian faith, which was instilled in him by his grandmother, helped him to accurately portray Bennet Omalu in Concussion, saying: "She was my spiritual teacher, she was that grandmother at the church, the one having the kids doing the Easter presentations and putting on the Christmas plays and her kids and grandkids had to be first. She was the most spiritually certain person that I had ever met in my entire life. Even to the point that when she was dying she was happy, like she was really excited about going to heaven." In 2018, Smith performed the Hindu rite of abhisheka of Shiva at Haridwar, India. He also performed an arti of the holy river Ganga. He has said that he feels a deep connection to Hindu spirituality and Indian astrology. Smith and his family also met and spent time with the Indian spiritual leader Sadhguru, stating that he enjoyed the heartfelt conversations between them.Smith donated $4,600 to the 2008 presidential campaign of Democrat Barack Obama. On December 11, 2009, Smith and his wife hosted the Nobel Peace Prize Concert in Oslo, Norway, to celebrate Obama's winning of the prize. In 2012, Smith said he supported legalizing same-sex marriage. In 2021, Smith announced that production of his upcoming film, Emancipation, was being pulled from the U.S. state of Georgia because of the recent passage of the Election Integrity Act of 2021, which critics viewed as a restrictive voting law, negatively impacting non-white voters. Smith and director Antoine Fuqua released a joint statement: "We cannot in good conscience provide economic support to a government that enacts regressive voting laws that are designed to restrict voter access".


== Public image and legacy ==
Smith has often been noted for achieving groundbreaking success throughout his musical career, and with his work as an actor in television and film. He has been cited as one of the "greatest actors" of his generation by several publications. Forbes referred to him as the "biggest movie star of the post-9/11 era". His transition from music to acting has influenced multiple rappers to also become actors, with him being cited as a pioneer for the rappers crossing over into acting by Complex. In 2006, Time named him one of the 100 most influential people in the world; in 2008, Esquire named him one of the 75 most influential people of the 21st century.Music
His work as a member of DJ Jazzy Jeff & the Fresh Prince made them the first rap act to win a Grammy Award, as well as the first to win an MTV Video Music Award for Best Rap Video, when the song "Parents Just Don't Understand" won in the inaugural rap categories at both award show ceremonies. XXL has referred to him as "one of the most important rappers of all time". As of 2013, his debut solo album Big Willie Style (1997) is among the best-selling rap albums of all time. Television 
Smith launched his acting career by starring in the NBC sitcom The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air; the show's success is considered to be a watershed moment for Hip-Hop and Black television, with many publications referring to it as one of the "Greatest Sitcoms of All Time". Professor Andrew Horton said, "Smith's genre of comedy, popularized on the sitcom Fresh Prince of Bel-Air translated well into commercial box-office appeal. The Fresh Prince watered down and capitalized upon the then growing popularity of Hip Hop and almost anticipated its dominance on the American scene".Moreover, author Willie Tolliver noted, "What The Fresh Prince did accomplish was to put Smith and his character Will into an environment of affluence and possibility, thus changing the terms of his own Black identity. This social and cultural mobility is central to Smith's racial significance, and this will become evident again and again; he moves the image of the Black male into unaccustomed spaces just as Smith himself was in the process of conquering Hollywood." Film 
After starring in his debut film Where the Day Takes You (1992), Smith quickly became one of Hollywood's most successful and bankable stars. He currently holds the record for the most consecutive $100-million-plus hits at the US box office, with eight. Smith starred as Daryl in the movie Bright (2017), which broke the record at the time for the most-viewed Netflix film ever for its first week, and became the first major Hollywood film to skip theatrical release over streaming platform for simultaneous viewing by more than 100 million people worldwide.For his role as Agent J in Men in Black 3 (2012), Smith earned the highest-paid movie role of all time, when he reportedly earned $100 million for his role in the film; furthermore his roles in the movies King Richard and Bright are also among the highest-paid roles of all time. His film Emancipation (2022) was sold to Apple Studios for $120 million in June 2020, which made it the largest film festival acquisition deal in film history. In 2022, Smith became the fifth black actor to win the Academy Award for Best Actor behind Sidney Poitier, Denzel Washington, Jamie Foxx, and Forest Whitaker.


== Discography ==

Big Willie Style (1997)
Willennium (1999)
Born to Reign (2002)
Lost and Found (2005)


== Filmography ==


== Awards and nominations ==

Smith has received multiple awards throughout his career, including an Academy Award for Best Actor for his role as Richard Williams, the prolific father and coach to championship tennis players Venus and Serena Williams, in the biopic King Richard (2021)—a role that also won him a Golden Globe Award, BAFTA Award and Screen Actors Guild Award in the same category; he also received a producer nomination for the Academy Award for Best Picture. Prior to this award, he had been nominated several times for the Academy Award (2; for Ali and The Pursuit of Happyness), the Golden Globe Award (5; for The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air, Ali, The Pursuit of Happyness and Concussion), and the Screen Actors Guild Award (once for The Pursuit of Happyness). In 2005, he received the honorary César Award; that same year, he was nominated for the Tony Award for Best Musical for Fela!; and in 2021, he was nominated as a producer of Cobra Kai for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Comedy Series.
Aside from acting and behind-the-scenes work on screen and stage, Smith has made ventures into hip hop with the release of several songs, four of which won him Grammy Awards—one for Best Rap Performance (for "Parents Just Don't Understand"), one for Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group (for "Summertime"), and two for Best Rap Solo Performance (for "Men in Black" and "Gettin' Jiggy wit It"); the former two of which he won as a member of the duo DJ Jazzy Jeff & The Fresh Prince.
His Emmy, Grammy, Oscar and Tony Award nominations make him one of few black actors to be nominated for all four major entertainment awards in the US.


== See also ==
African-American culture
List of black Academy Award winners and nominees
Representation of African Americans in media § Television


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Iannucci, Lisa M. (2009). Will Smith: A Biography. Santa Barbara, Calif.: Greenwood Press. ISBN 978-0-313-37610-8.
Smith, Will; Manson, Mark (2021). Will. New York: Penguin Press. ISBN 978-1-984-87792-5. Memoir.


== External links ==

Official website 
Will Smith at IMDb
Will Smith discography at MusicBrainzBashar Barakah Jackson (July 20, 1999 – February 19, 2020), known professionally as Pop Smoke, was an American rapper. Born and raised in Brooklyn, New York City, he rose to fame with the release of his breakout singles "Welcome to the Party" and "Dior" in 2019. He often collaborated with UK drill artists and producers, who employed more minimal and aggressive instrumentation than American drill artists from Chicago, reintroducing the sound as Brooklyn drill.
Following his rise to fame, record producer Rico Beats introduced Pop Smoke to Steven Victor in April 2019. Victor would later have Pop Smoke sign a recording contract with Victor Victor Worldwide and Republic Records. He released his debut mixtape Meet the Woo in July 2019. His second mixtape, Meet the Woo 2, was released on February 7, 2020, and debuted at number seven on the  Billboard 200, becoming the rapper's first top-10 project in the United States.
Twelve days after the mixtape's release, Pop Smoke was murdered during a home invasion in Los Angeles. New York rapper 50 Cent was the executive producer of his posthumous debut studio album, Shoot for the Stars, Aim for the Moon, released on July 3, 2020. The album debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 and all 19 tracks from the album were charted on the Billboard Hot 100. The album also spawned a string of international top-10 singles, including "For the Night" (featuring DaBaby and Lil Baby) and "What You Know Bout Love". A year later, Republic Records released Pop Smoke's second studio album, Faith, on July 16, 2021.


== Early life ==
Bashar Barakah Jackson was born on July 20, 1999, in Brooklyn, New York City, to a Jamaican mother, Audrey Jackson, and a Panamanian father, Greg Jackson. He had an older brother named Obasi. Jackson attended nine different schools while growing up in Canarsie, Brooklyn. He played the African drums in his local church as a child.Jackson was expelled from eighth grade for bringing a gun to school. He spent two years on house arrest after being charged with possessing a weapon. Jackson started playing basketball as a point and shooting guard. He relocated to Philadelphia to enroll in Rocktop Academy. He was later forced to leave after being diagnosed with a heart murmur, and Jackson eventually turned to street life.


== Career ==
In a Genius interview, he stated that his artist name of Pop Smoke is a combination of Poppa, a name given to him by his Panamanian grandmother, and Smocco Guwop, a nickname from childhood friends and it was also his old Instagram name. He first attempted rapping during a 2018 visit to a Brooklyn recording studio with Jay Gwuapo. In late 2018, he was rapping over a beat from 808Melo's YouTube channel, Jackson recorded a track titled "MPR (Panic Part 3 Remix)" during the session. On January 28, 2019, he released "Flexin'". Meanwhile, Jackson befriended producer Rico Beats, who was acquainted with record executive Steven Victor.
The three set up an interview, and in April 2019, Jackson signed to Victor Victor Worldwide and Republic Records. On April 23, 2019, Jackson released his breakout single, "Welcome to the Party", that was produced by 808Melo. Many remixes of the song were later recorded, with the commercially released versions featuring Nicki Minaj and the other featuring Skepta. Jackson released his debut mixtape Meet the Woo on July 26, 2019. From October to December 2019, Jackson released multiple singles, including "War" with Lil Tjay, and "100k on a Coupe" with Calboy.On December 27, 2019, Jackson appeared on Travis Scott's Cactus Jack Records compilation album JackBoys on the song "Gatti" which was also accompanied by a music video. "Gatti" debuted and peaked at number 69 on the US Billboard Hot 100, giving Jackson his first and only Hot 100 appearance before his death. On January 16, 2020, Jackson released "Christopher Walking". On February 7, 2020, twelve days before his death, Jackson released his second mixtape Meet the Woo 2, with features from Quavo, A Boogie wit da Hoodie, Fivio Foreign and Lil Tjay.The mixtape debuted at number seven on the US Billboard 200, earning Jackson his first top-10 hit in the United States. Five days after its release, a deluxe edition was released with three new songs, each featuring a guest appearance, consisting of Nav, Gunna, and PnB Rock. Jackson teased to social media his debut headlining concert tour Meet the Woo Tour to promote both his mixtapes. The tour was planned to begin in the US in March, and end in the UK in April.


== Posthumous releases ==
"Dior", the second single off Meet the Woo, became Jackson's first posthumous solo hit, peaking at number 22 on the Billboard Hot 100 and number 33 on the UK Singles Chart. At the beginning of March 2020, American rapper 50 Cent announced on his Instagram that he had decided to executive produce and finish Jackson's debut studio album. After his announcement, 50 Cent called artists like Roddy Ricch, Drake, and Chris Brown wanting to feature them on the record. Pop Smoke had wanted to take his mother to an awards show prompting 50 Cent to promise to take her to one when the album was complete.On April 16, 2020, a documentary on Pop Smoke's life was announced to be in the works. On May 14, 2020, Victor announced that Pop Smoke's debut studio album would be posthumously released on June 12, 2020. The album was named Shoot for the Stars, Aim for the Moon. It was originally set for release on June 12, 2020, but was pushed back out of respect for the George Floyd protests. Instead, on the album's original release date, the lead single, "Make It Rain", featuring fellow Brooklyn rapper Rowdy Rebel was released.Rebel's verse was recorded through a collect call since he was incarcerated at the time. Virgil Abloh created the album's original artwork. The cover artwork provoked significant criticism from fans who called it "lazy" and "rushed" and felt it was disrespectful. It prompted a Change.org petition attracting tens of thousands of signatures. Ryder Ripps created the final cover art with the chrome rose against a black background. Jackson's mother chose the final album cover hours before the album was released commercially.The album was officially released on July 3, 2020, to commercial success, reaching number one in several countries, including on the Billboard 200. All 19 songs on the album charted on the Billboard Hot 100, with "For the Night" featuring Lil Baby and DaBaby, debuting and peaking at number six, giving Pop Smoke his first top-10 hit in the US. On July 20, 2020, which what would have been Jackson's 21st birthday, a deluxe edition of the album was released, and featured 15 new additional tracks.The album's fifth single "What You Know Bout Love", ended up peaking at number nine on the Billboard Hot 100, giving Pop Smoke his second top-10 hit in the US. On February 26, 2021, "AP" was released as the lead single for the Boogie soundtrack. Pop Smoke was cast as Monk in a minor role for Boogie.Without assistance from 50 Cent, a second posthumous album titled Faith was released on July 16, 2021, to mixed reviews. It debuted at number one on the Billboard 200, making Pop Smoke the first artist to have their first two posthumous albums debut at the top of the chart. A deluxe version, featuring four additional tracks, was released on July 20, 2021, which what would have been Jackson's 22nd birthday. Six more tracks were added on July 30.


== Legal issues ==
On January 17, 2020, after returning from Paris Fashion Week, Jackson was arrested by federal authorities at John F. Kennedy International Airport after stealing a Rolls-Royce Wraith, valued at $375,000, whose owner reported it stolen after Jackson had reportedly borrowed it in California for a music video shoot on the condition it would be returned the next day. Investigators believed he arranged for the car to be transported on a flatbed truck to New York. He posted a photo of himself in front of the stolen car on Instagram and Facebook. The car was recovered by authorities at Jackson's mother's house, in the Canarsie section of Brooklyn.After his arrest, police questioned him about a non-fatal shooting that took place in Brooklyn in June 2019. The police thought he had information on the shooting because they claimed to have footage of him driving a car in reverse near the scene of the crime. The police also tried to pressure Jackson into telling them more information about the Crips, GS9, and other Brooklyn street gangs, but he refused to talk.He was charged with grand theft auto, posted a $250,000 bond, and agreed to stay away from known gang members and submit drug tests to the US pretrial services. The conditions Jackson was put under hindered some of his performances like the "BK Drip Concert" at Kings Theatre in Flatbush in February 2020, as gang members were in the audience.


== Murder ==
On February 19, 2020, Jackson was renting a house through Airbnb owned by The Real Housewives star Teddi Mellencamp and her husband, Edwin Arroyave, in Hollywood Hills, California. At around 4:30 a.m., five hooded men, including one wearing a ski mask and carrying a handgun, broke into the house through a second-story balcony. The intruders held a gun to a woman's head and threatened to kill her. Shortly thereafter, the woman heard the men shoot Jackson three times after an altercation.The LAPD received news of the home invasion from a call from the East Coast. Police arrived at the home six minutes later and found Jackson with multiple gunshot wounds. He was rushed to Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, where doctors performed a thoracotomy on the left side of his chest. A few hours later, he was pronounced dead. He was 20 years old. On February 21, the Los Angeles County Department of Medical Examiner-Coroner revealed that the cause of Jackson's death was a gunshot wound to the chest.The LAPD at first suspected that Jackson's death was gang-related, as he was tied to the Crips. However, the LAPD later believed his death was the consequence of a home robbery gone wrong. It was believed the intruders stole Jackson's gold watch and other jewelry before running away from the house. In May 2021, a 15-year-old, the youngest of the four intruders, allegedly admitted to killing Jackson over a diamond-studded Rolex during a recorded interview with a cellmate at a juvenile detention center. The 15-year-old told the cellmate that Jackson at first complied with their requests for jewelry but then tried to fight them, and a confrontation broke out in which Jackson was pistol-whipped and shot with a Beretta M92. The intruders made off with his Rolex, which they sold for $2,000.The day before his murder, Jackson and friend Michael Durodola posted several images on social media, including one in which Mellencamp's home address can be seen in the background. The rapper also posted a story on Instagram and Facebook of gifts he had received. One showed the house's full address on the packaging, giving out its location.Jackson's body was originally planned to be buried at the Cypress Hills Cemetery but was later changed to Green-Wood Cemetery. Family, friends, and fans of Jackson gathered in his hometown of Canarsie, Brooklyn, to show their respects. His casket was pulled in a horse-drawn carriage and was surrounded by glass windows and white curtains. On September 11, 2021, it was discovered that his grave site was vandalized, with the headstone smashed.On July 9, 2020, three adult men and two minors were arrested for the murder of the rapper. One of the adult suspects has been charged with murder with a special circumstance that alleged the killing was committed "during the commission of a robbery and a burglary", and another charged with attempted murder. The two juveniles were charged with murder and robbery in juvenile court. As California law requires a minor to be at least 16 at the time of the crime, the 15-year-old could not be tried as an adult; and, under George Gascón's policy to keep all juveniles in juvenile court, the 17-year-old could not be tried as an adult, either.


=== Remembrance ===
Jackson's parents, Audrey and Greg Jackson, shared memories of their son before saying how gun violence took him away from them.

On February 19th, at 4:00 AM, a gun was used to take my son from me. You know him as Pop Smoke, we called him 'Shar'. Because of gun violence, I'll never see my son run up the front of our steps, taking them two at a time; he won't ever take my hands again and dance with me; he won't come into my room and muscle pose in the mirror. Gun violence destroys families. It must stop.
Danny Schwartz wrote in The Ringer that "Pop Smoke conquered New York rap and gave the city the kind of readymade and potentially defining star it hadn't seen in years". He claimed that "in New York City city, 'Welcome to the Party' was more omnipresent than hits like 'Old Town Road'."Jackson's work ethic was widely praised by his peers in the music industry. The executive producer of his posthumous album, 50 Cent, revealed Smoke was always "writing what [50] said down" on his telephone, while Quavo added he "felt like [he] was talking to somebody that had been in the game for three years already".Producer Rico Beats stated that, in his last few months, Jackson started "telling kids, don't go the gang route", wanting to "be a better person". A few months after his death, his family announced the creation of Shoot for the Stars, a foundation Jackson had planned to create prior to his death, with the goal of helping and inspiring inner-city youth. After his death, several murals of him were created in Canarsie.  Although his lyrics do not generally contend with police brutality or racism, his songs, particularly "Dior", were popularly used during the George Floyd protests in New York City as a symbol of resistance.


== Meet the Woo Tour ==
The Meet the Woo Tour was scheduled to be the debut headlining concert tour by Pop Smoke. It was launched in support of his two mixtapes, Meet the Woo (2019) and Meet the Woo 2 (2020), and had been set to consist of concerts in North America and the United Kingdom. The tour was announced in January 2020, with dates being released at the same time. Pop Smoke later added more UK tour dates after high demand from fans.
Tour dates were released on the same day for North America, while dates for the United Kingdom were revealed in February. Due to high demand from fans, more tour dates for the UK were revealed on February 13, 2020. Pop Smoke shared a promotional flyer for the tour on social media. Pop Smoke and his team were planning on finishing, mixing, and mastering his debut studio album Shoot for the Stars, Aim for the Moon, starting the first week of March 2020.In an interview with Revolt, Pop Smoke's DJ Jeffrey Archer talked about the tour. "Honestly, it's nothing planned yet. We just got those dates. This is officially going to be our first real big tour. This is going to be a month. I'm very excited about it. We're going to a few places we've never been to. We've been getting feedback over the last seven months [from] fans like, 'Please come out here.' There are loyal fans at these shows. You should expect a lot more music and shows. He has a lot of music coming out with a lot of artists. He's not playing. We're definitely shaking the room in 2020."The tour was canceled after Pop Smoke was shot and killed. Fans were offered refunds after Pop Smoke's death: "As we mourn the loss of this great artist, refunds will be available at point of purchase."


=== Canceled shows ===


== Discography ==

Shoot for the Stars, Aim for the Moon (2020)
Faith (2021)


== Awards and nominations ==


== Filmography ==


== See also ==
List of murdered hip hop musicians


== References ==Corey Brent Penn Sr. (born October 8, 1968), known by his stage name CL Smooth, is an American rapper. He is best known as the vocal half of the hip-hop duo Pete Rock & CL Smooth.


== Early Life ==
Corey Brent Penn Sr. was born on October 8, 1968 in New Rochelle, New York to a mother who was still in high school and a father who was largely absent after his birth. His main caregivers were his grandmother, who worked as a pediatric nurse, and his grandfather, who worked as a dry-cleaning presser.


== Career ==
After the duo Pete Rock & CL Smooth split in 1995, Pete Rock produced (and remixed) tracks for dozens of other acts and released instrumental solo albums, while CL Smooth remained musically inactive.
Since their split, the two managed to reconcile their differences only long enough to record five tracks over the course of ten years, namely "Da Two," "Back On Da Block," "Fly 'Til I Die," "Appreciate," and "It's A Love Thing." In 2004, there was talk of a reunion and a new album. This, however, was thwarted by another fallout.
During this period, CL Smooth mostly declined to appear on other artists' albums, with the exception of "Only the Strong Survive" with DJ Krush in 1996.
Starting around the year 2006, CL Smooth began making guest appearances slightly more frequently. Among the artists to whose songs he has contributed guest vocals are AZ ("Magic Hour"), Raekwon (“Silk”, also featuring Sauce Money), Nujabes ("Sky Is Falling"), JR Writer (the remix of "Mesmerize"), and Supafuh ("Act of Faith"). As of 2022, his most recent guest appearance was on the song “The Masters” by the Canadian rapper-producer duo of Ghettosocks and DK.
CL Smooth released his debut solo album, American Me, in 2006. To promote the album, Shaman Work released a promotional mixtape compiled by DJ J Period called Man On Fire in late April 2006, featuring 36 minutes of freestyles and a remixed version of the track "Impossible". He was also featured on the DJ Jazzy Jeff album The Return of the Magnificent on the track "All I Know," which was also featured in the video game NBA Live 08. Around the same time, he released a single called “Perfect Timing”, featuring Skyzoo.
In October 2010 Smooth and Pete Rock headlined the Clean Energy Tour.  The tour had six shows all over California, and focused on voter mobilization leading up to the November 2010 midterm elections. CL
Smooth has developed an interest in, and become an activist in opposition to, climate change. He was a vocal opponent of Proposition 23.In February 2019, CL Smooth released a single entitled "Just In Town", featuring and produced by Fleezy E and Wayno Da Producer for Da Watchmen.


== Discography ==


=== Solo albums ===
American Me (2006)
The Outsider (2007)


=== Pete Rock & CL Smooth albums ===


=== Collaborations ===
Johnny Gill featuring CL Smooth - "Rub You The Right Way (Extended Hype I)" (1990)
Basic Black featuring Pete Rock & CL Smooth "She's Mine" (1990)
Heavy D & The Boyz featuring Big Daddy Kane, Grand Puba, Kool G Rap, Q-Tip & Pete Rock & CL Smooth - "Don't Curse" (1991)
Greg Osby featuring CL Smooth - "Raise" (1993)
Da Youngstas featuring Pete Rock & CL Smooth -"Who's The Mic Wrecka" (1993)
Run-DMC featuring Pete Rock & CL Smooth - "Down With the King" (1993)
DJ Krush featuring CL Smooth - “Only the Strong Survive" (1996)
Pete Rock featuring CL Smooth - "Da Two" (1998)
Pete Rock featuring CL Smooth - "Back on the Block" (2001)
Pete Rock featuring CL Smooth - "Appreciate" (2004)
AZ featuring CL Smooth - "Magic Hour" (2006)
Nujabes featuring CL Smooth - "Sky Is Falling" (2007)
Vee featuring CL Smooth - "Da Piano" (2009)
JR Writer featuring CL Smooth - “Mesmerized” [Remix] (2009) (alternate version also features Fishscales of Nappy Roots)
Cradle Orchestra featuring CL Smooth - "All I Want" (2009)
Cradle Orchestra featuring CL Smooth & Jean Curley - "Married To The Game" (2010)
John Legend & The Roots featuring CL Smooth - "Our Generation (The Hope of the World)" (2010)
Supafuh featuring CL Smooth - “Act Of Faith” (2011)
Raekwon featuring CL Smooth & Sauce Money - “Silk” (2013)
Ghettosocks & DK featuring CL Smooth & El Da Sensei - “The Masters” (2022)
Real Bad Man & Blu - "The Golden Rule" (2023)


== References ==


== External links ==
https://www.meccadonclsmooth.com
https://www.facebook.com/therealclsmooth
https://twitter.com/realclsmooth
https://instagram.com/therealclsmooth
https://soundcloud.com/realclsmooth
CL Smooth at IMDbSam Sneed (born Samuel D. Anderson; February 29, 1968) is an American producer and rapper. He originally got his start working as a producer for K-Solo and the Hit Squad.


== Biography ==


=== Early years ===
In 1993, he was signed to Death Row Records, releasing only one single, "U Better Recognize" featuring Dr. Dre in 1994. The single appeared on the Murder Was the Case soundtrack, and peaked at #16 on the Billboard Hot Dance Music/Maxi-Singles Sales chart, #18 on the Hot Rap Tracks chart and #48 on the Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Singles & Tracks chart.. He became well known for a catchphrase, "My name is Sam Sneed, you better recognize!" which originally appeared on the Snoop Dogg debut album, Doggystyle. He also appeared in the Death Row movie, Murder Was the Case.Sam Sneed also co-produced the hit songs "Keep Their Heads Ringin'" and "Natural Born Killaz" with Dr. Dre. "Natural Born Killaz" was originally supposed to be a Sam Sneed and J-Flexx song called "The Heist". The original alternate version of "Natural Born Killaz" with Sam Sneed rapping a verse was released on the Ultimate Death Row Collection on November 24, 2009.  He recorded an album on Death Row Records with his group Street Scholars in 1996 which included J-Flexx, Sharief (now known as Killer Ben) & Drauma (now known as Stocks McGuire) which remains unreleased.
Sneed was diagnosed with a brain tumor in 1999, which put a temporary halt to his career;  but has since recovered and is once again an active hip hop producer. He has since produced songs for the likes of G-Unit, Scarface, Jay-Z and many others, Sam went to work with Dr. Dre in 2007 again, but nothing manifested. He has since started a new company with his business partner Craig "Stretch" Mason, Nustarz Entertainment. The label features new artists managed by Sam such as The Boy Goldy, Money Ink and British rapper, producer and songwriter Nat Powers.In 2010, Death Row/WIDEawake Entertainment announced the release date (January 25, 2011)  for Sam Sneed's album Street Scholars, which contained four unreleased songs from Sneed's time at Death Row, along with 10 newly recorded tracks.


== Discography ==

Street Scholars (2011)


== References ==James Timothy "Tim" Holland Jr. (born September 25, 1977), better known by his stage name Sole, is an American underground hip hop artist from Portland, Maine. He is one of eight co-founders of the record label Anticon. He has been a member of the groups Northern Exposure, Live Poets, Deep Puddle Dynamics, So-Called Artists, Da Babylonianz, Sole and the Skyrider Band and Waco Boyz.


== Career ==
Sole recorded his first demo in 1992. At age 15, he assembled 45 Below Records, which included rappers Alias, JD Walker, and producer DJ Moodswing9 (then known as Cuz the Highlander). Sole and Moodswing9 released the album Mad Skillz and Unpaid Billz together as Northern Exposure, selling more than 300 copies. In 1997, Sole released a 12" as Live Poets with JD Walker and Moodswing9. It garnered college radio play and sold a few thousand copies.
In early 1998, Sole and rapper Pedestrian coined the name Anticon and together started a collectively owned record label under the name. Later it was set up as a standard corporation with eight shareholders. In the same year, Sole traveled to Minneapolis with Alias and Doseone. They recorded the album The Taste of Rain... Why Kneel? as Deep Puddle Dynamics with Slug of Atmosphere. Sole and Pedestrian moved Anticon to Oakland, California.
In 2000, Sole released the first official solo album Bottle of Humans on Anticon. As So-Called Artists, he released Paint by Number Songs with Alias and DJ Mayonnaise in 2001. Sole's second solo album Selling Live Water was released in 2003 and received positive reviews; Pitchfork Media gave it a 7.3, Metacritic gave it a score of 77 out of 100.Later that year, he moved to Barcelona. Two years later, he released the third solo album Live from Rome in 2005. Soon after, he moved back to the United States, relocating to Flagstaff, Arizona.In 2007, Sole released Sole and the Skyrider Band as Sole and the Skyrider Band. Its second album Plastique was released in 2009. In 2010, Sole left Anticon, citing a desire to further experiment with his music, independently of the collective, and also due to his belief that the label developed away from what he initially intended it to be. Sole and the Skyrider Band then released its third album. Hello Cruel World was released in 2011 to generally positive reviews.
Aside from his official releases on Anticon, Sole has also released self-produced albums on his own imprint Black Canyon. These include various compilations of unreleased material, as well as the releases of his Man's Best Friend project, various mixtapes, and collaborations with platinum certified producer DJ Pain 1. As he is no longer with Anticon, Sole currently self-releases his solo records.


== Personal life ==
Sole is based in Brunswick, Maine. He married Yasamin Al-Hussaini on January 1, 2004, and her name is referenced occasionally in his lyrics. While living in Denver, Sole was active in the local outpost of the Occupy Wall Street political movement, various anarchist projects and hosts a podcast about revolutionary politics and radical philosophy called "The Solecast."


== Selected discography ==

Sole

Bottle of Humans (Anticon, 2000)
uck rt (2001)
Selling Live Water (Anticon, 2003)
Mansbestfriend Pt. 2: No Thanks (2003)
Live from Rome (Anticon, 2005)
Mansbestfriend Pt. 3: Myownworstenemy (2005)
Poly.Sci.187 (Anticon, 2007)
Desert Eagle (2008)
A Ruthless Criticism of Everything Existing (Black Canyon, 2012)
No Wising Up No Settling Down (Black Canyon, 2013)
Crimes Against Totality (Black Canyon, 2013)
Mansbestfriend 7 (Black Box Tapes, 2015)
Let Them Eat Sand (Black Box Tapes, 2018)
Destituent (Black Box Tapes, 2019)
MBFX (Black Box Tapes, 2021)Sole & DJ Pain 1

Death Drive (Black Canyon, 2014)
Nihilismo (Black Box Tapes, 2016)
No God nor Country (Black Box Tapes, 2019)
Post American Studies (eMERGENCY hEARTS, 2022)Sole and the Skyrider Band

Sole and the Skyrider Band (Anticon, 2007)
Plastique (Fake Four Inc., 2009)
Hello Cruel World (Fake Four Inc., 2011)Whitenoise (Sole with Yasamin Holland)

No More Dystopias (Black Canyon, 2013)
Ruins (Black Box Tapes, 2015)Other collaborations

What's It All About (45 Below, 1996) (with JD Walker & Moodswing9, as Live Poets)
The Taste of Rain... Why Kneel? (Anticon, 1999) (with Alias, Doseone & Slug, as Deep Puddle Dynamics)
Red Dawn: A Baybridge Epic (2001) (with Pedestrian, as Da Babylonianz)
Paint by Number Songs (Mush, 2001) (with Alias & DJ Mayonnaise, as So-Called Artists)


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Sole on DiscogsChristopher Darnell Cook (born October 5, 1988), professionally known as Sonaro, is an American music producer from Far Rockaway, New York. He is perhaps best known for producing songs for Brooklyn-bred rapper Fabolous. He has also produced for several other rappers, such as French Montana, Jeezy, Jadakiss, Styles P, Flipp Dinero, Lloyd Banks, Paul Cain, Prodigy, Jim Jones, and Meek Mill.


== Life and career ==


=== Early life and career beginnings ===
Sonaro was born in Far Rockaway and raised in Brooklyn. Interested in music production from an early age, Sonaro became an in-house producer for Needlz where he learned to craft his sound. During this time, Sonaro landed his first placement on Stack Bundles Biddin' War Vol 2. hosted by DJ Clue, producing the song "Rockin' it” featuring Jim Jones and Max B. Sonaro soon followed this up with "Thang On Me" from Lil' Kim’s Ms. G.O.A.T. project, which featured Maino, Mister Cee, and Sha Dash.


=== Commercial Breakthrough ===
On March 5, 2010, Fabolous and DJ Drama released the mixtape There Is No Competition 2: The Funeral Service which featured the Sonaro produced street single "Body Ya." The song was quickly added to Hot 97, and Def Jam officially released the song on There Is No Competition 2: The Grieving Music EP. The EP featured additionally production from Sonaro, and new contributions from Lex Luger, Ryan Leslie, and Jahlil Beats.
Later work with Fabolous from this period includes "Leaving You," "Swag Champ," "B.E.T." featuring Jadakiss and Styles P, and "Want You Back" featuring Joe Budden and Teyana Taylor. Sonaro also contributed production to projects by Lloyd Banks, Jim Jones, Nya Lee, Meek Mill, and French Montana, and licensed several instrumentals for the TV show Love & Hip Hop.


=== The S.O.U.L. Tape 3 ===
On December 25, 2013 Fabolous released The S.O.U.L. Tape 3 which featured Sonaro on three songs; "Playa," "Situationships" featuring Mack Wilds, and "Cuffin' Season." "Cuffin' Season" was instantly added to radio and received major press from Hot 97's Funkmaster Flex who called it "the hottest record in the Big Apple."The official video for "Cuffin' Season"  premiered on REVOLT on April 25, 2014, and features Sonaro performing the chorus alongside Fabolous.


=== Summertime Shootout ===
On November 26, 2015 Fabolous released Summertime Shootout. The project contains four songs produced by Sonaro; "For The Summer," "Vanilla" featuring Rich Homie Quan, "Motivation," and "The Plug."On November 27, the music video for the Sonaro produced "The Plug" was released exclusively to World Star Hip Hop and gained over 1,800,000 views in less one day.


== Partial Discography ==
2022

"Bach 2 Bach" by Fabolous and Dave East2019

"1 Time" by Jeezy2018

"IDW2K" by A Boogie, Pretty Lou, and Angelica Villa
"So Cold" by Flipp Dinero2017

"Happy April Fools" and "La Tonta De Abril" by Karen Rodriguez2016

"To The Sky" by Fabolous featuring 070 Shake
"For The Family" by Fabolous featuring Dave East and Don Q2015

"For The Summer" by Fabolous
"Motivation" by Fabolous
"Vanilla" by Fabolous featuring Rich Homie Quan
"The Plug" by Fabolous
"How U Luv Dat" by Fat Joe featuring Troy Ave and Sonaro
"On The Line" by Audubon
"I Used To" by Dave East2014

"Last Night" by Jim Jones featuring Jadakiss and Sonaro
"Cuffin' Season (Remix)" by Fabolous featuring 50 Cent and Sonaro2013

"Cuffin' Season" by Fabolous featuring Sonaro
"Situationships" by Fabolous featuring Mack Wilds and Tiara Thomas
"Playa" by Fabolous
"F.O.H." by DJ Prostyle featuring Fabolous and French Montana
"Gotta Love That" and "Love Blazin'" by Nya Lee
"Ride Like This" by Omelly (Dream Chasers Records)
"211" by Bynoe featuring Prodigy
"Always On Broadway" by Jim Jones2012

"Want You Back" by Fabolous featuring Joe Budden and Teyana Taylor
"Wake Up" by Lloyd Banks2011

"Swag Champ" by Fabolous
"B.E.T." by Fabolous featuring Jadakiss and Styles P
"Young Fly Flashy" by Lloyd Banks
"Leaving You" by Fabolous2010

"Body Ya" by Fabolous
"Body Count" by Fabolous


== References ==Mario John Treadway (born May 3, 1980), better known by his stage name, Souleye, is an American hip hop artist. He has released 12 albums, including his latest, Disguised As Tomorrow, which was released in March 2023.  Among others, he has performed and recorded with BLVD, and his wife, Alanis Morissette.He has also collaborated in the studio with artists such as South African rock musician Esjay Jones, Lynx, Lila Rose, fellow rappers like Big Samir, Main Flow and Chachillie and more.
Souleye is a strong advocate for using his music to raise consciousness by writing about themes such as self-discovery, mental health, inner child work, therapy and spirituality. He is also known as a master of lyrical wordplay, polyrhythmic rapping, beatboxing, and rapid-fire freestyling.


== Early life and education ==
Souleye was born in Sturbridge, Massachusetts. He began rapping in high school, from which he  graduated in 1999. Souleye went on to attend Western New England College on a basketball scholarship for a year before leaving school. He then traveled the country, living in West Palm Beach, Florida all the way to Mount Shasta, California, Colorado, Los Angeles, and then up to the Bay Area, following his calling. He had an older brother who died by suicide.


== Career ==


=== Early years ===
In 2001 he began writing, performing and traveling with a loosely knit collective of conscious hip hop artists called the Transcendental Alliance; in 2003, he released an album titled Soul Sessions with underground hip hop artist Campaign.The same year, Souleye's best friend was diagnosed with cancer. After his death, Souleye retreated to Mount Greylock in The Berkshires of Massachusetts, where he wrote the album Flexible Morality. In 2004, his brother died by suicide, and while cleaning out his apartment Souleye discovered that his brother had affixed a sticker which read "Music Matters" on the ceiling where he hanged himself.  Given the same sticker by his brother years previously, Souleye embraced "Music Matters" as his mission statement and released UniverSoul Alchemy that same year.In 2006, he teamed up with producer Samuel "Sleepyhead" Pohner in Asheville, North Carolina, and as Souleye & Sleepyhead, they released Intergalactic Vibes.  The album won a new music contest sponsored by Relix, and as the contest winners, Souleye and Sleepyhead performed on the weeklong Jamcruise 4.  While there, Souleye freestyled with Michael Franti, and was invited to play with Bassnectar.  Following the Jamcruise, he performed extensively with Bassnectar.  Souleye wrote and recorded  the song "Amorphous  Form" on Bassnectar's album Underground Communication.  In 2007, Souleye joined the San Francisco-based electronic band BLVD, with whom he recorded the album Music for People.  He toured with the band until 2009, and subsequently began performing once again as Souleye.He met his wife Alanis Morissette at a meditation gathering in a Los Angeles residence in 2009, and they were married in 2010. Souleye opened Morissette's 2012 "Guardian Angel" tour and has since collaborated with her frequently.  He released the album Iron Horse Running in 2013 and Identified Time in 2014.


=== Shapeshifting and WILDMAN (2015–2017) ===
In 2015, Souleye released his album Shapeshifting. The full-length album featured focus tracks, "The Victim" and  "Labeled". The music video for "The Victim" premiered on Yahoo Music and "Labeled" made it to the Top 20 Official European Independent Music Charts. The album featured artwork by acclaimed visual artist Rob Prior.
On November 11, 2016, Souleye released the debut single, "Follow Your Heart", to his forthcoming album WILDMAN. Following up to his first single, Souleye released "Snow Angel" featuring Alanis Morissette in January 2017. The music video premiered on Fuse TV and has been reviewed and featured by The Huffington Post. The album was produced by Crush Effect and was released in September 2017. It featured a number of other hit singles, including the title track featuring Lynx.


=== Soul School (2019) ===
In 2019, Souleye released Soul School, featuring his first collaboration with South African vocalist Esjay Jones, as well as other collaborations with 2Mex, Sabi, Donny Arcade, and Chachillie, on tracks like "Sacred Design", "Felicity" and "Come Down".


=== Hunting Teardrops and Disguised as Tomorrow (2021–Present) ===
He followed up that album with 2021's hunting teardrops, once again working with painter Rob Prior on the cover. The album spun off a number of hit singles and music videos for songs like "Ghost Steps", "Incredible Hulk", "Fireside", "Doorway to the Future" and "Time's Game".  
The following year, Souleye released the single 'Emergency", featuring Morissette on the song's chorus. Shortly after, he enlisted veteran music producer ill.GATES to make a remix of the song. It became his most streamed song to date.
On March 3, 2023, Souleye released his 12th full-length studio album, Disguised As Tomorrow, which features some of his most dynamic and ambitious tracks yet, including collaborations with Esjay Jones, fellow rappers Big Samir and Main Flow, and singer/songwriter and activist Lila Rose. The album has spurred a half dozen singles, including "Human Spirit", "Letter To The Old Me", "The Unheard", "Protected", "Weight of Your Soul", and "Exit the Maze", as well as "Emergency".Disguised As Tomorrow was inspired by the COVID-19 pandemic and explores the idea that the 'tomorrow' we may anticipate for ourselves may not always be the one that comes to pass. The sound is a departure from the lighter tone of hunting teardrops, with much darker and heavier sounds for a more sonically complex musical journey. It has received tremendous praise from critics, some calling it 'album of the year' and "a whole-hearted masterpiece".


== Personal life ==
Souleye and singer-actress Alanis Morissette married on May 22, 2010. Their son Ever was born on December 25, 2010, their daughter Onyx on June 23, 2016, and their son Winter on August 8, 2019.


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===
Disguised As Tomorrow 2023
Hunting Teardrops 2021
Soul School 2019
Wildman 2017
Shapeshifting 2015
Identified Time 2014
Iron Horse Running 2013
Music For People (with BLVD) 2008
Balance in Babylon 2007
Intergalactic Vibes 2005
UniverSoul Alchemy 2004
Flexible Morality 2003
Soul Sessions 2002


=== Guest appearances ===
VokabKompany& Stephan Jacobs - "Me Against Me" single 2013
VokabKompany - "Let it Fly" single 2013
Apaulo 8 - "Youthful Inheritance" from Infinite Possibilities 2011
Lila Rose - "Magick" from Osmos Your Sonica 2009
MiMosa - "Delivery" from Hostilis 2009
Random Rab - "Clarification of Meaning From a Rose" 2009
STS9 - Hidden Hand, Hidden Fist from Peaceblaster The New Orleans Make it Right Remixes 2009
Seventhswami -"Escape Artist" from Here For Now 2009
On The One - "Love Addiction" (remix) from Love Addiction 2008
"Shine" from The New Kong 2008
Breakbeatbuddah - "Mind Check" from Mind Bombin 2007
Lynx - "Just One Step" from Grain Of Sand 2007
Bassnectar - Amorphous Form from Underground Communication 2005


== References ==


== External links ==
Official siteNaeem Juwan Hanks, better known by his stage name Spank Rock, is an American rapper and songwriter from Baltimore. He rose to fame with his 2006 album YoYoYoYoYo, which was produced by former group member Alex Epton (XXXChange). A harbinger of post-millennial alternative rap, the duo became known for its mixing of disparate hip hop and club genres, including Baltimore club, Miami bass, electro music and rock.
In 2007, Epton left the group to pursue his own production while Juwan went on to release the Bangers & Cash EP (2007) with pop producer Benny Blanco. After a five-year contract struggle with his label Downtown Records, Juwan released his second album, Everything Is Boring and Everyone Is a Fucking Liar, with a range of producers including Boys Noize, Le1f, XXXChange, and Squeak E. Clean.


== Biography ==
Juwan grew up in West Baltimore in a row home alongside five sisters and two brothers. As a teenager, Juwan frequented clubs such as Paradox, where DJs played Baltimore club music. In high school, his older sister introduced him to Brooklyn-based producer J. Period, known for producing records by underground rappers Mos Def and Artifacts. J. Period mentored Juwan and helped him improve his skills as a rapper for some time. After moving to Philadelphia and dropping out of college, Juwan met fellow Baltimore native Alex Epton, who had studied composition at the New England Conservatory of Music in Boston and learned studio production as an intern at the DFA Records studio in New York.Juwan and Epton started performing under the name Spank Rock together in Philadelphia and Phoenixville, where their reputation quickly increased. They later toured with Hollertronix and M.I.A. They also toured with Beck in 2006. Spank Rock's debut studio album, YoYoYoYoYo, was released in 2006 on the Big Dada record label. It was nominated for the 2006 Shortlist Music Prize.In 2007, Alex Epton (XXXChange) left Spank Rock to pursue his own production while Naeem Juwan signed a deal with Downtown Records. Spank Rock's first Downtown Records release came in the form of fall 2007's Bangers & Cash EP, a 2 Live Crew-inspired collaborative EP with Benny Blanco.In 2010, Spank Rock was featured, along with The View's Kyle Falconer, on "The Bike Song" by Mark Ronson, which appeared on Ronson's 2010 album Record Collection. Spank Rock toured with Ronson for the album's 2010 UK tour.
The following year, Spank Rock released his second studio album, Everything Is Boring and Everyone Is a Fucking Liar, on his own label, Bad Blood Records. Pitchfork premiered the first single from the album, titled "Energy," produced by Boys Noize, and later selected the single "Nasty" as a "Best New Track." Rolling Stone premiered the album in September 2011 on their website. The album featured production from Boys Noize, XXXChange, Sam Spiegel, and Le1f, as well as appearances by Santigold and Big Freedia. After the release of his album, Spank Rock was selected to be one of the faces of Alexander Wang's 2011 T collection, along with Santigold.In 2012, Spank Rock released a second EP, E. I. B. A. E. I. A. F. L. Remixes, a collection of various producers' remixes of tracks from Everything Is Boring and Everyone Is a Fucking Liar. He also co-wrote the Boys Noize-produced track "Look at These Hoes" from Santigold's album, Master of My Make-Believe.Spank Rock released his third EP, The Upside, in 2014 on Bad Blood Records and Boysnoize Records, with production contributions from Kid Kamillion, Boys Noize, and Damian Taylor. Lead single "Gully" was remixed by Brodinski and Switch, and received extensive play on BBC Radio 1.Spank Rock began appearing in concerts in 2016 as an MC with Australian electronic music group The Avalanches. He subsequently appeared in performances at Coachella and Vivid Sydney in 2017.
Under the Naeem moniker, Juwan released a solo studio album, Startisha, in 2020. It features contributions from Justin Vernon, Francis and the Lights, Ryan Olson, Swamp Dogg, Velvet Negroni, Amanda Blank, and Micah James.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===
YoYoYoYoYo (2006)
Everything Is Boring and Everyone Is a Fucking Liar (2011)
Startisha (2020) (as Naeem)


=== Mixtapes ===
Couche Tard (2006)
How Can We Lose When We're So Sincere (2022) (as Naeem)


=== DJ mixes ===
FabricLive.33 (2007)


=== EPs ===
Bangers & Cash (2007) (with Benny Blanco)
E. I. B. A. E. I. A. F. L. Remixes (2012)
The Upside (2014)


=== Singles ===
"Put That Pussy on Me" (2005)
"Rick Rubin" (2006)
"Sweet Talk" (2006)
"Bump" (2006)
"Energy" (2011)
"Car Song" (2011)
"I Know a Place" (2014)
"Gully" / "Vertigo" (2014)
"Gully (Brodinski Remix)" (2014)
"Assassin" / "Back Up" (2014)


=== Guest appearances ===
DJ Kentaro - "Free" from Enter (2007)
Justice - "D.A.N.C.E. (Remix)" (2007)
Shy Child - "Kick Drum" from Noise Won't Stop (2007)
Feadz - "Back It Up" from Ed Rec Vol. 3 (2008)
The Chemical Brothers - "Keep My Composure" from Brotherhood (2008)
Kylie Minogue - "Heart Beat Rock" (Benny Blanco Mix featuring Spank Rock) from X (2008)
Santogold - "Shove It" from Santogold (2008)
Neon Neon - "Trick or Treat" from Stainless Style (2008)
Japanther - "Radical Businessman" from Tut Tut, Now Shake Ya Butt (2008)
Deekline & Wizard - "Roll That Shit" from Booty Breaks Vol. 3 (2008)
Steve Aoki - "We Are Rockstars" from Pillowface and His Airplane Chronicles (2008)
Heartsrevolution - "Ultraviolence (Remix)" (2009)
N.A.S.A. - "Wachadoin" from The Spirit of Apollo (2009)
Ninjasonik - "My Eyes" from Darth Baño (2009)
Staygold - "Backseat" (2010)
Crookers - "Park the Truck" from Tons of Friends (2010)
Mark Ronson - "The Bike Song" from Record Collection (2010)
Rebecca & Fiona - "Church Is on Fire" from I Love You, Man! (2011)
The Death Set - "7PM Woke Up an Hour Ago" from Michel Poiccard (2011)
Addison Groove - "Bad Things" from Transistor Rhythm (2012)
Le1f - "Star Alliance" (2013)
Cakes da Killa - "I Run This Club (Remix)" (2014)
Trippy Turtle - "Trippy's Theme (TWRK Remix)" (2014)
Boys Noize - "Birthday" from Mayday (2016)
Nick Hook - "Another Way" from Relationships (2016)


=== Compilation appearances ===
"Hoodie (Spank Rock Remix)" on Chocolate Swim (2006)


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website
Spank Rock discography at Discogs
Spank Rock (archive) at Boysnoize RecordsKevin Keaton (born August 26, 1963), professionally known by his stage name Special K, is an American old-school hip hop emcee from the Bronx, New York. He was prominent in the late 1970s, throughout the 1980s and early 1990s, and best known as member of the Treacherous Three. He is the younger brother of T La Rock and the older brother of rapper Tony Tone (later known as T.O.N.E.-z) who was a member of the Hip Hop duo Style.


== Career ==


=== Early career ===
In the late 1970s, he met Kool Moe Dee and DJ Easy Lee. Special K joined with other rappers Kool Moe Dee and L.A. Sunshine as well as DJ Easy Lee to form the influential old school hip hop group the Treacherous Three. It is with the Treacherous Three that Special K performed his freestyle. In 1981, they moved to Sugar Hill Records along with another Enjoy Records act Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five. The Treacherous Three became well known for their singles "Feel the Heartbeat" and "Whip It". They released their debut full-length album and were featured in the 1984 film the breakdance cult-movie Beat Street performing the song "Xmas Rap" with Doug E. Fresh, but disbanded shortly afterwards with each member pursuing solo careers. Later on during his life he met Kornel Misiek who went on to fund his second album which sadly never was released to a larger audience.


=== Solo career ===
Special K issued his debut solo 12-inch single on Republic Records in 1987 which was titled "Special-K Is Good", and another one 12" in 1998 titled "Knockout" via PKO Records. In 1990 he made his guest appearance on Boogie Down Productions' track "Original Lyrics" from Edutainment, and in 1991 he co-produced Ed O.G.'s Life of a Kid in the Ghetto LP. The Treacherous Three came back together with their reunion sophomore album Old School Flava in 1994.


== Discography ==


=== Singles ===
1980 – "At the Party" (w/ Treacherous Three)
1980 – "The New Rap Language" (w/ Spoonie Gee & Treacherous Three)
1980 – "The Body Rock" (w/ Treacherous Three)
1981 – "Put the Boogie in Your Body" (w/ Treacherous Three)
1981 – "Feel the Heartbeat" (w/ Treacherous Three)
1982 – "Yes We Can-Can" (w/ Treacherous Three)
1982 – "Whip It" (w/ Treacherous Three)
1983 – "Turning You On / U.F.O." (w/ Treacherous Three)
1983 – "Action" (w/ Treacherous Three)
1983 – "Get Up" (w/ Treacherous Three)
1984 – "Santa's Rap / At Christmas Time" (w/ Treacherous Three & Luther Vandross)
1984 – "Xmas Rap" (w/ Treacherous Three)
1985 – "Gotta Rock / Turn It Up" (w/ Treacherous Three)
1987 – "Special-K Is Good / Let's Rock"
1988 – "Knockout"
1994 – "We Come Phat" (w/ Treacherous Three)
1994 – "Feel the New Heartbeat" (w/ Treacherous Three)


=== Albums ===
1983 – Whip It, (Sugar Hill Records/Vogue)
1984 – The Treacherous Three, (Sugar Hill Records)
1994 – Old School Flava, (Wrap Records)


== References ==James Bromley Spicer (May 12, 1958 – September 27, 2019) was an American hip hop recording artist who released a number of old school rap singles during the late 1970s and early 1980s including the classic "Dollar Bill Y'all," for which he was perhaps best known.  Spicer was managed by Russell Simmons' Rush Management. His single "The Bubble Bunch" featured  Jellybean Benitez's first remix.An obituary of Spicer in The New York Times described his 15-minute-long debut single, "Adventures of Super Rhyme," as being "widely regarded as the first true storytelling rap." Spicer's music was sampled by hip-hop artists including the Wu-Tang Clan, 2Pac, De La Soul, and Busta Rhymes. Rapper LL Cool J has cited Spicer's music as sparking his interest in hip-hop.Spicer had four daughters, Angelina, Leticia, Janel, and Princess and one son, James. In 2018, he was diagnosed with advanced brain and lung cancer. He died on September 27, 2019, at the age of 61.


== Discography ==
"Adventures of Super Rhyme (Rap)" (1980), Dazz Records - 12-inch single
"The Bubble Bunch" (1982), Mercury (US) - 12-inch single
"Money (Dollar Bill Y'all)" (1983), Spring Records - 12-inch single
"This Is It" / "Beat The Clock" (1985), Def Jam Recordings - 12-inch single
"I Rock Boots" (1990), Def Valley Records - 12-inch single
"$ Can't Buy U Luv (Money Can't Buy You Love)" (2010), Spice Rhymes 


== References ==


== External links ==
Bio at Oldschoolhiphop.comGabriel Jackson (born May 27, 1963), better known by his stage name Spoonie Gee, is one of the earliest rap artists, and one of the few to have released rap records in the 1970s. He has been credited with originating the term hip hop and some of the themes in his music were precursors of gangsta rap.


== Career ==
Jackson was born in Harlem, New York City, receiving his 'Spoonie' nickname as a child because the spoon was the only utensil that he used to eat with. His mother died when he was twelve years old, and he went to live with his uncle, the record producer Bobby Robinson, in whose apartment he began to practice rapping.His first recording came about after Peter Brown visited Robinson's record store and mentioned that he was looking to make a rap record. Spoonie's name was suggested, and he recorded "Spoonin' Rap", which was released on Brown's Sound of New York, USA imprint, featuring a lyric that included jailhouse references that would later become common in gangsta rap, and with echo applied to his vocals. Spoonie Gee has been described as "the original gangsta rapper".He then recorded for Robinson's Enjoy! Records; his first release for the label being the similarly minimalistic "Love Rap" (on which he was accompanied on congas by his brother Pooche Costello), issued on the B-side of the Treacherous Three's "New Rap Language" (on which he also featured), leading to his early nickname of 'The Love Rapper'. Jackson was a founding member of the Treacherous Three, along with L.A. Sunshine and Kool Moe Dee. Although the group added Special K as a member when Jackson left to record his first single, Gee maintained ties and affiliation with the group, and also played a hand in the group getting their first record deal. The group was named Spoonie Gee and the Treacherous Three when Jackson returned for a period before going solo.He left Enjoy! and moved to Sugar Hill Records, where he enjoyed further hits with "Spoonie's Back" and the collaboration with the Sequence on "Monster Jam". In 1985, he moved on again to Aaron Fuchs' Tuff City label, on which the majority of his later output was issued, including "That's My Style", on which he attacked Schoolly D for copying his style. By the mid-1980s, he was also working in a rehabilitation centre for people with learning disabilities. His career took off once again in 1987 with his debut album The Godfather of Rap, produced by Marley Marl and Teddy Riley, and issued on the Tuff City label. His career has since been hampered by several spells in prison.In the mid-1990s, a compilation of his work, Godfather of Hip Hop, was issued on the Ol' Skool Flava label. In the mid-2000s, he returned with a new EP, The Boss Is Back.In 2008, "Love Rap" was ranked number 65 on VH1's 100 Greatest Songs of Hip Hop.


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===
The Godfather of Rap (1987), Tuff City
Old and New Jams (1989), BCM (compilation)
Old and New Jams/The Godfather (1993), BCM (compilation)
Godfather of Hip Hop (1996), Ol' Skool Flava (compilation)


=== Singles ===
"Spoonin' Rap" (1979), Sound of New York
"Love Rap" (1979), Enjoy! – B-side of Treacherous Three's "New Rap Language"
"Monster Jam" (1980), Sugar Hill – Spoonie Gee Meets The Sequence
"Spoonie Is Back" (1981), Sugar Hill
"Re-Mix of Spoonie Rap" (1982), Heavenly Star
"The Big Beat" (1983), Tuff City/Epic
"Get Off My Tip" (1985), Tuff City
"New Love Rap" (1985), Enjoy!
"Street Girl" (1985), Tuff City
"That's My Style"/"I'll Serve You Right" b/w "Take It Off " (1986), Tuff City
"I'm All Shook Up" (1987), Tuff City
"The Godfather" (1987), Tuff City
"(You Ain't Just a Fool) You's an Old Fool" (1988), Tuff City
"Mighty Mike Tyson" (1988), Tuff City
"Spoonin' Rap" (1999), Ol' Skool Flava
"Bodyrock" – Moby featuring Spoonie G (1999), Mute, V2
The Boss Is Back EP (2005), New Sound of Harlem


== References ==


== External links ==
Discography at DiscogsRyan Michael Peters (born July 1, 1985),  better known by the stage name Spose, is an American rapper from Wells, Maine.


== Early life ==
Peters was born in Portland, Maine. He grew up in Wells, Maine.
Although he began rapping in eighth grade, he did not pursue it as a career until after he graduated from Wells High School in 2004. As a youth, started a rock band, The Frothy Four.
Peters attended University of New Hampshire as an English major and later transferred to Suffolk University; however, he was offered a record deal when he was two classes from graduating and did not finish.


== Music career ==
Adopted the stage name Spose, he self-released his first album, Preposterously Dank in 2007. He continued to work selling lobster at the Barnacle Billy's restaurant in Ogunquit.Spose released the We Smoked It All mixtape with rapper Cam Groves in 2009. In January 2010, his single, "I'm Awesome" (from his We Smoked it All mixtape), received airplay on Maine radio stations. In February 2010, after the song caught on in other parts of the US, Spose signed a record deal with Universal Republic Records and announced that he would begin working on a music video.In March 2010, the video was filmed in Wells at the town-owned activity center where Spose had his first concert at the age of 24. The video was released on April 14, 2010. "I'm Awesome" peaked at #37 on the Billboard Hot 100. "I’m Awesome" brought about his comedy hip hop style. Spose later stated in an interview with that he had left Universal in late 2010 without releasing anything with the label.On October 25, 2010, Spose announced through a series of Facebook posts (which were linked to Twitter) that he felt that We Smoked It All Vol. 2 had too many original songs to be considered a mixtape. Partially because of this, he decided to create a project, Happy Medium, with many original songs that were originally supposed to be on We Smoked It All Vol. 2, in addition to other material.  He also said that new songs from Happy Medium would be released at 4:20 PM Eastern Time every Wednesday up until the release of Happy Medium. On December 17, 2010, Spose released Happy Medium for streaming on his Facebook page. The physical album was released in Bull Moose Music stores in late December 2010, and it was released on iTunes in January 2011.We Smoked It All Vol. 2 was released intentionally on April 20, 2011, at midnight.
Spose has a part in "Red Cup (I Fly Solo)" by Cash Cash and "Better Side of Me" by Sparks the Rescue. Spose announced in an interview with 92.3 Now that he had left Universal Republic Records.
In January 2012, "I'm Awesome" became the theme to the comedy series Mr. D. Spose released the music video for his single "Pop Song" on February 22, 2012. He released his third album The Audacity!, on April 16, 2012, on iTunes. On October 24, 2012, Spose launched a crowdfunded fundraiser on Kickstarter.com to raise $25,000 to fund The Yard Sale. It was funded on November 23, 2012, raising $28,147.
The Peter Sparker Mixtape was released as a free download on June 10, 2013. Deluxe physical copies were sold at bullmoose.com. Dankonia, a mixtape entirely over Outkast instrumentals (with other connections to Outkast, such as the album title, named after Stankonia, which also shares the same release date as Dankonia) was released for free on October 31, 2013.  A physical copy was released in limited numbers on bullmoose.com on November 5, and the Almost Complete Lyrics Book was released on November 29, also on the BullMoose website.
Spose released his fourth studio album, Why Am I So Happy, in 2015. On April 4, 2017, he released his fifth album, Good Luck With Your Life, locked in a mobile game The King Of Maine with an extra song, "I Wanna Keep It."


== Personal life ==
As of 2015, Spose has four children, including a set of twins, with his long term partner turned wife, K.P.


== Discography ==
Studio albumsCollaboration albumsWe Smoked It All Vol. 3: The Album (with Cam Groves)
We Smoked It All Vol. 4 (with Cam Groves)Compilation albumsThe Yard Sale (2012)MixtapesWe Smoked It All (2009) (with Cam Groves)
We Smoked It All Vol. 2 (2011) (with Cam Groves)
The Peter Sparker Mixtape (2013)
Dankonia (2013)Live albumsSpose Unplugged (2013)
Spose & The Humans Live In Denver (2021)Singles


== References ==


== External links ==
Official websiteDavid James Parker (born October 26, 1962), known by the stage name Busy Bee, is an American old-school hip hop musician from New York, NY. First coming on the New York City music scene in 1977, Busy Bee worked with many of hip-hop's founding fathers, including Melle Mel, Afrika Bambaataa, and Kool DJ AJ.


== Career ==
Known for his comedic rhymes, Busy Bee originally gained a large following through MC rap battles in Staten Island, Brooklyn, and New Jersey. He was famously roasted by Kool Moe Dee at Harlem World in Manhattan, NY, December 1981, in one of the earliest documented rap battles. In 1985, he won the New Music Seminar's MC World Supremacy Belt. In the early 1980s Afrika Bambaataa asked Busy to join his Zulu Nation where the young MC would DJ for Bambaataa's Zulu Nation parties. Busy Bee continues to rhyme today, most recently appearing on KRS-One and Marley Marl's collaborative 2007 album Hip-Hop Lives.
Busy Bee was featured in the 1983 film Wild Style, billed as the first hip-hop motion picture, directed by Charlie Ahearn. More recently, he played himself in the 2002 inner-city drama Paid in Full. In 2007, he was included in the video documentary Hip Hop Legends.Thirty years after the song's initial release, in 2018 Robert Rippberger directed the official music video for “Suicide” by Busy Bee, the single off his gold album Running Thangs. The video features a cameo by artist Ice-T.


== Personal life ==
He currently resides in Las Vegas Nevada, with Michelle, his wife of over 20 years. He has two daughters.


== Discography ==
Albums

1988 – Running Thangs (Strong City/Uni/MCA Records) - #48 on the Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums
1992 – Thank God for Busy Bee (Pandisc Records)Singles

"The Marvelous Three and the Younger Generation" (Busy Bee, DJ Small, AJ, Cowboy, Kid Creole, Melle Mel, Mr. Ness, Rahiem) - Rappin' All Over (Brass Records - 1980)
"School Days" (Master Five - 1981)
"Making Cash Money" (Sugar Hill - 1982)
"Busy Bee's Groove" (Sugar Hill - 1985)
"Suicide" (Strong City/Uni/MCA - 1987)
"Express" (Strong City/Uni/MCA - 1988)
"Keep It Movin'" (Blazin' - 2002)
"Rock the House" (Blazin' - 2002)


=== Guest appearances ===


== References ==


== External links ==
"Busy Bee". Discogs.Patrick Owen Baril (born January 23, 1982), professionally known as Statik Selektah, is an American record producer, disc jockey (DJ) and radio personality originally from the Boston, Massachusetts area. He is also the founder of Showoff Records. In 2010, he formed the hip hop group 1982, alongside American rapper Termanology. He has resided in New York City since 2004.


== Life and career ==
Statik Selektah was born on January 23, 1982, in Lawrence, Massachusetts. He was introduced to music at a young age, experimenting with his parents' eight-track machine, cassette recorders, and turntable. By middle school, he was already DJing school functions, but he was inspired to be a professional DJ after hearing DJ Premier and Funkmaster Flex scratch and mix records on Hot 97 in New York City. Statik began doing radio at Phillips Exeter Academy's WPEA, where he also occasionally DJ'd some of the Afro-Latino Society Parties. Naming himself DJ Statik, (the "Selektah" came later after hearing a local reggae artist say it unconsciously) he began to start to DJ at clubs and private parties up and down the New England Coast. In 2000, Selektah moved back to Massachusetts from New Hampshire to pursue an audio production degree at Boston's New England Institute of Art. Around this time, Statik started to put out his own mixtape series titled "Spell My Name Right." In 2003, Statik created ShowOff Marketing, which has had clients such as Reebok, G-Unit Records, Virgin Records, Capital, Universal Records, Puff Daddy's Vote or Die campaign and many others. In 2006, Statik Selektah made Showoff into a record label and put out Termanology's Out the Gate as the labels first release. In 2007, Statik released his first LP, titled Spell My Name Right, and came out with a second Stick 2 the Script in 2009. In 2010, Statik Selektah dropped another album 100 Proof: The Hangover which reached 37 on Billboard's Heatseeker Albums Chart. Besides dropping his own albums, he also has produced on many other artist's projects. Statik currently has a show on Thursday nights on Eminem's Shade 45 XM/Sirus Radio Station.In 2009, Statik Selektah appeared on Grand Theft Auto: Episodes from Liberty City, featured as a DJ on the hip hop radio station The Beat 102.7.
While recording with rapper Freeway on Ustream, he announced a song off his next album, Population Control, called "Groupie Love" which features Mac Miller.  This track was included on the final release of the album in 2011.
Since 2015, the publishing interest of Statik Selektah's catalog has been represented by Reservoir Media Management.In May 2017, Statik announced with Billboard that he signed a management deal with Roc Nation plus announcing his eighth studio album titled 8. It was later released on December 8, 2017.
On November 27, 2020, Statik released his ninth studio album titled The Balancing Act featuring collaborations with Joey Badass, Black Thought and Bun B.


=== Past and present radio stations ===
WPEA 90.5fm – Exeter, NH (1996–1998)
WERS 88.9fm – Boston, MA (2000)
WBOT 97.7fm – Boston, MA (2001–2004)
WBLX – Mobile, AL (2005–2009)
KMJJ – Shreveport, LA (2006–2008)
Shade 45 Sirius/XM New York City (2005–present)
KDON 102.5fm – Santa Cruz, CA (2009–2011)
WJMN 94.5fm – Boston, MA (2008–2011)


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===
Spell My Name Right: The Album (2007)
Stick 2 the Script (2008)
100 Proof: The Hangover (2010)
Population Control (2011)
Extended Play (2013)
What Goes Around (2014)
Lucky 7 (2015)
8 (2017)
The Balancing Act (2020)
Round Trip (2023)


=== Collaboration albums ===
All In A Day's Work (with Saigon) (2009)
1982 (with Termanology – as 1982) (2010)
1982: The EP (with Termanology – as 1982) (2010)
The Evening News EP (with Termanology – as 1982) (2010)
Statik-Free EP (with Freeway)  (2011)
Lyrical Workout (with Bumpy Knuckles) (2011)
Lord Giveth, Lord Taketh Away (with Freddie Gibbs) (2011)
State of Grace (mixtape) (with Slaine) (2011)
Well-Done (with Action Bronson) (2011)
Straight, No Chaser (with Reks) (2012)
2012 (with Termanology as 1982) (2012)
Stereo Type (EP) (with Strong Arm Steady) (2012)
Stereo Type (LP) (with Strong Arm Steady) (2012)
Ambition (with Bumpy Knuckles) (2012)
AGE (All Green Everything): Open Season (with JFK) (2012)
Boom Bap & Blues (with Jared Evan) (2013)
The Proposal (with Ransom) (2013)
Still Blue (with Jared Evan) (2014)
Statik KXNG (with KXNG Crooked– as Statik KXNG) (2016)
Saints X Sinners (with Millyz) (2017)
Ugly Face (with Quadir Lateef) (2017)
Still 1982 (with Termanology as 1982) (2018)
Piecework (with Plays) (2019)
TrillStatik (with Bun B) (2019)
Gran Turismo (with Curren$y) (2019)
Yuck! (with Anoyd) (2019)
Give Thanks (with Paul Wall) (2019)
Dicey Business (with Slick Jack) (2019)
Powerful Music (with Stunna Gang) (2019)
Chinchilla (with Wais P) (2020)
Fresh Air (with Ufo Fev) (2020)
Rudebwoy (with CJ Fly) (2020)
The Quarantine (with Termanology as 1982) (2020)
Endless Summer (with Bobby J From Rockaway) (2020)
To Kill a Sunrise (with Kota the Friend) (2021)
Maxed Out (with Ot the Real) (2022)
TrillStatik 2 (with Bun B) (2022)
To See a Sunset (with Kota the Friend) (2023)


=== EPs ===
The Pre-Game EP" (2009)
Statik Selektah's The Lost and Damned EP" (2009)
The Left-Overs (Of What's To Come…) EP (2010)
Not Dead Yet! (EP) (with Lou From Paradise) (2021)


=== Instrumentals ===
Statik Selektah Presents: Spell My Name Right, The Instrumentals (2007)
Stick 2 The script Instrumentals (2008)
100 Proof: The Hangover Instrumentals (2010)
Statik Selektah & Termanology are 1982 Instrumentals (2010)
Well Done: The Instrumentals (2012)
8 Instrumentals (2017)
Mahalo (2019)
TrillStatik: Deluxe Instrumental Version (2019)


=== Mixtapes ===
The Best of A3C: Remixed by Statik Selektah (2016)


== References ==


== External links ==

Showoff Records website
Statik Selektah intimate interview on Conspiracy Worldwide Radio Sep 2010Stephen Jerome Williams (March 10, 1968 – April 29, 2020), known by his stage name Stezo, was an American rapper and producer.


== Career ==
Stezo was born Stephen Williams in 1968 in New Haven, Connecticut. He first appeared on the hip-hop scene as a dancer for the group EPMD. He appeared in the video for EPMD's single "You Gots to Chill" from their 1988 album Strictly Business. After this experience Stezo sought a career as a hip-hop artist on his own.
In 1989, Stezo signed a record deal with Sleeping Bag Records and released his 12-inch single "To the Max" and eventually a full album Crazy Noise. Stezo handled all rapping and production on the album. The single received some attention around the time it was released. The album charting at #37 on the Billboard R&B albums chart, and received praise for its very funky production and on-point rapping. The album's two singles both charted on Billboard Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Chart.
Despite the success of his debut album, Stezo didn't release more music for five years. In 1994, he released the single "Bop Ya Headz"/"Shining Star". Then in 1997 he released his follow-up album Where's the Funk At. The album received little attention and did not chart. In 2005, Stezo released a third album, C.T. (The Lost State), paying homage to his home state of Connecticut.
Stezo died in his sleep on April 29, 2020, at age 52, from heart complications.


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===
Crazy Noise (1989) – U.S. Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Albums #37
Where's the Funk At (1997)
C.T. (The Lost State) (2005)
The Last Dance (2021)


=== Singles ===


== References ==David Blake (born July 31, 1988), better known by his stage name David Stones is an American hip hop recording artist and songwriter from Brooklyn, New York. He is the co-founder of District of Hip Hop also known as the DOHH Squad.
David started receiving notoriety in 2010 while still known by the pseudonym Stones after remixing Diddy Dirty Money's hit song Hello Good Morning and releasing a music video to accompany it. Among the websites and blogs to showcase the video was Spike.com. He then followed up with a music video to his song "Steppin Out" which was featured on the rapper 50 Cent's official video blog BooBooTV. He was labeled a “HHL Co-Signed Artist” by HipHopLead.com and featured in their “Unsigned Spotlight” section that same year.


== Life and career ==


=== 1988–2011: Early life and musical beginnings ===
David Stones was born in the Brownsville section of Brooklyn, New York. An area known as one of the roughest neighborhoods in not only the borough of Brooklyn but also the entire state of New York. Rapping was a hobby he picked up from watching his cousin Kenyatta Blake, better known as Buckshot from the critically acclaimed 90's rap groups Black Moon and Boot Camp Clik. When asked about his cousins influence over his career in an interview David replied, "I use him as a mentor, so when I run into some type of jam in the game I can always hit him up and ask, 'what do you think about this?'".While a freshman in high school David Stones formed a rap group with his childhood friend Dominick Bunch under the name Styxx ‘N Stones. The two participated in spontaneous rap battles and cyphers throughout their neighborhood in an attempt to build up their reputation as respectable emcees. Although they recorded a lot of music together they never officially released any projects as a group and decided to go their separate ways with Styxx enlisting in the US Navy while David chose to keep pursuing a career in music, but they remained friends. In 2012 Styxx died in a car accident.In 2006 David released his first mixtape entitled, “The New Stone Age” under the pseudonym Stones. The project didn't circulate too far outside of the Tri-State Area due to lack of promotion, however it did get him recognized locally. His local buzz led to him getting noticed by hometown hero Smooth Da Hustler who he later collaborated with on a revamped version to one of the mixtapes songs called, "Get Wit It".From 2007–008 David released various songs and freestyles independently on his Myspace page. The following year he caught the attention of Gallic Wars Mixtapes CEO who offered him a management deal in 2009. He then went on to release his second mixtape, "The 2009 Collection" which featured a collection of songs, freestyles, and interviews recorded that year on New Year's Eve.David Stones took a hiatus from the music industry for the second half of 2010 and the entire 2011 after switching management and decided to change his stage name from Stones to David Stones, stating the name change symbolized "progression" and marked "a new chapter" in his career.


=== 2012: The Steppin Stone: All Or Nuthin ===
On November 22, 2012, David Stones released his third mixtape, The Steppin' Stone: All Or Nuthin' which features guest appearances from Buckshot, Mark Jonas, and Willie the Kid.The mixtape featured standout tracks such as, "Why I Love It" which caught the attention of No Malice from the critically acclaimed rap group Clipse who then tweeted David his appreciation for the song. Hip Hop blogger Tony Grands described the song as a "piano-heavy anthem" while Christopher Bryan of RapRise declared David's "trying to bring the East Coast back in a real way". It also featured "Triumph 2012", in which David remixes the classic Wu-Tang Clan song and features Willie The Kid who is the younger brother of Wu-Tang affiliate La the Darkman. While reviewing the track Hip Hop blogger Erin Ashley noted David's bravery stating it took "real guts" to remake a classic song such as Wu-Tang’s “Triumph”, a song she stated, "dominates people’s lives to this day." Ashley then went on to shower David with praises for the bold move saying he "held his own" while describing it as "that 90s New York [she's] been longing for." The mixtape also featured the title track "All Or Nuthin" where David talks about his struggles and reminisces on his fallen partner-in-rhyme, Styxx. Who Need's A Genre? applauded David for the "raw emotion" and "knowledge" displayed on the song.In a review of the mixtape Joshua Hendricks applauded David Stones for putting together a project that's not just "a blabbering bunch of random words", stating his "flow is consistent", and he raps about real issues. When speaking on the mixtapes production he called it "really good", noting there are "some ride in the whip worthy tracks" while labeling “The truth”, “Live @ The Ramada”, and “Systm Bumpn" as the projects standout tracks.


=== 2013–present ===
From 2013–2014 Stones released only one song, a remix of Drake's 0 to 100 / The Catch Up single. Music journalist Skinny Friedman reviewed the track and gave it a 70 rating on the scale of 0 to 100.


== Artistry ==


=== Influences ===
In an interview with former NFL player, Anthony Henry's online music magazine David Stones cited his hometown as a key musical influence and stated it's "fast-paced" lifestyle is responsible for the "experiences and the insight" that shows in his music. He then went on to state, "I always try to present a picture of what’s going on in my mind in a genuine way that people can relate to" when asked to describe the best aspects of his style. While speaking on '90s hip hop a.k.a. "The Golden Age" which he described as "super original" he specifically referenced Wu-Tang Clan, Jay-Z, Nas, AZ, Boot Camp Clik, Dungeon Family, Snoop, and Dr. Dre as some of his "all time favorites".


== Discography ==


=== EP's ===
"Less Talk - EP"* (2016) 
"Goliath" (TBA)


=== Mixtapes ===
The New Stone Age (2006)
The 2009 Collection (2009)
The Steppin' Stone: All Or Nuthin' (2012)


=== Singles ===
"I'ma Get It" (2015)


== References ==


== External links ==

DavidStonesMusic.com Official SitePatrick Charles (born September 7, 1972), better known by his stage name Street Life, is an American rapper who is a close associate of the Wu-Tang Clan and its affiliate Wu-Tang Killa Beez, particularly of Method Man. He was born in the Bronx, moved to Houston, Texas, and later moved to Staten Island where he grew up.


== Musical career ==
He made his debut with an appearance on "Mr. Sandman" from Method Man's debut album Tical. It was originally intended to appear on Ghostface Killah's Ironman on the track "Box In Hand" but the track was pulled from the album at the last minute (the track replacing it subsequently becoming known as "Box In Hand", it being too late to change the album packaging). The original version became known as "Box In Hand (Remix)." Street went on to make two appearances on Wu-Tang Clan's second album Wu-Tang Forever in 1997 and seven appearances on Method Man's second album Tical 2000: Judgement Day the next year, after which he continued to make appearances on the Clan's albums and on the members' various solo projects.
His solo debut album was originally intended to be released in the busy 1998–1999 period but, as was soon to become the norm for Wu-Tang releases, it was repeatedly delayed, eventually seeing release titled Street Education in 2005. Though Method Man only made three short appearances on the album, he was billed as the executive producer. Alongside Cappadonna, he has been featured on every group album besides their debut. He appeared on 8 Diagrams on the tracks "Starter" and "Tar Pit" (on the non-U.S. and limited edition Best Buy version). Neither Street Life nor Cappadonna were credited with guest appearances.
Street Life, like his partner Method Man, is also an avid video gamer, and claims to be able to play at SOCOM for as long as 18 hours straight. He used to play basketball as a teenager, and wanted to go to college, but a car accident damaged his knees. His love for the game remains as he coaches his son's basketball team. Street Life will be releasing new music with 1st cousin Hanz On.
He continues to closely record with the core clan.


== Legal issues ==
In November 2009, Street Life and Wu-Tang producer Mathematics "were taken into custody on a Monday night after a routine traffic stop led to the discovery of a large stash of marijuana and ecstasy on their tour bus" while traveling through Arkansas in November. According to police reports, "The bus was filled with smoke and the odor of marijuana." The cops then boarded the vehicle and discovered "marijuana blunts and residue... laying in plain sight". The officers reportedly also found 100 ecstasy tablets and $8,615 in cash.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===
Street Education (2005)


== Compilations ==
Natural Born Hustler (2006) (European re-issue of Street Education)
Back to Back: Raw & Uncut (2008)


=== Appears on ===


== References ==Adrian Bartos (born September 29, 1969) known professionally as DJ Stretch Armstrong is a New York-based DJ and music producer, known as a former co-host of hip hop radio show The Stretch Armstrong and Bobbito Show, alongside Bobbito Garcia.


== Early life ==
Bartos grew up in the Upper East Side of New York City. He was obsessed with boomboxes as a child and had an older sister who was into early disco music in the seventies, bringing records home to listen to. He started DJing in downtown New York City, making his own concert flyers out of cardboard, scissors, and glue. Bartos graduated from Columbia University in 1994.


== Career ==


=== Radio and music ===
From 1990 to 1998, Bartos co-hosted The Stretch Armstrong and Bobbito Show on Columbia University's WKCR. It featured exclusive demo tapes and in-studio freestyles from many then-unsigned pop artist such as The Brinson Club and hip hop artists such as Nas,  Big Pun, Jay-Z, Busta Rhymes, Fat Joe, Cam'ron, DMX, Wu-Tang Clan, Fugees, Talib Kweli, Big L and The Notorious B.I.G. who later found great success on major record labels. In 2020 the pair produced an album called No Requests with a group of musicians called the M19, named for a bus in Manhattan connecting the Upper East Side to the Upper West Side. The album is a reimagining of hip-hop's foundational songs with some updated lyrics and no sampling.Bartos co-hosted NPR's podcast What's Good with Stretch and Bobbito which began in 2017. The show which was about art, politics, and sports, as well as music, interviewed people such as Dave Chappelle and Stevie Wonder.His musical career, along with Garcia, was made into a movie Stretch and Bobbito: Radio That Changed Lives, which was picked up by Netflix in 2015 on the 25th anniversary of the pair's radio show. The Source Magazine called their show "The Best Hip Hop Radio Show of All Time" in 1998.


=== Bibliography ===
Bartos' first book, with archivist Evan Auerbach, No Sleep: NYC Nightlife Flyers 1988-1999 , was released through Powerhouse Books. He explains that it's "a book that chronicles basically the history of New York City nightclubs from ‘88 to ‘99 as told through club flyer art."


== References ==


== External links ==
Stretch and Bobbito film websiteMichael Francis Seander (born October 30, 1988), known professionally as Mike (stylized as mike.; formerly Mike Stud), is an American hip hop recording artist. His first musical recognition came with the release of his viral single "College Humor", which he recorded on GarageBand ironically while he was a relief pitcher at Duke University.


== Early life ==
In 2006, Seander graduated from St. Raphael Academy in Pawtucket, Rhode Island.  At 6 ft 2 in (1.88 m), he lettered in both baseball and basketball and was named Rhode Island's 2006 Gatorade Player of the Year, earning him an athletic scholarship to Duke University. Seander earned 2nd team all-state honors in basketball after averaging 21 points and 7 rebounds as a senior. He earned an 8-2 record with a 0.72 ERA and 88 strikeouts for the Saints as a junior. In his senior season, he posted a 9-2 record, an ERA of 0.91, and struck out 107 en route to being named both the Gatorade Player of the Year and Louisville Slugger Player of the Year in Rhode Island.


== Baseball career ==
After graduating, Seander attended Duke University in Durham, North Carolina, to play baseball. While at Duke University, he was teammates with current Chicago Cubs pitcher Marcus Stroman, who is now generally noted as Seander's best friend. He was named the team's closer as a true freshman. Seander saved 9 games in 28 appearances and earned a 1.61 ERA (lowest in Duke baseball history). Those 9 saves were the fifth highest total in school history and was good for fourth best in the ACC that season. At season's end, Seander was named to the Louisville Slugger and Rivals.com Freshman All-American teams. The Rhode Island native also spent a summer in 2007 as the closer for the Newport Gulls in the NECBL.
Seander suffered from arm issues following his sophomore season that would eventually require Tommy John surgery. After missing the entire 2009 season recovering from the surgery, Seander graduated from Duke on the All-ACC Honor Roll with a 3.4 GPA. He decided to use his final year of college eligibility at Georgetown University in Washington, D.C. He appeared in 9 games as a senior for the Hoyas, striking out 9 in 8.2 innings pitched, and earned a graduate degree in sports management.


== Music career ==
While recovering from surgery, Stud turned to music to pass the time.In December 2010, Stud released a music video for "College Humor". Stud stated that he originally made the track as a joke for his baseball teammates. Since its release, the video has been viewed over 2.5 million times (as of April 2021). In March, Stud followed up his hit with "In This Life", which featured West Coast rapper Alex Lagemann.
All three hits were featured on Stud's first mixtape—A Toast to Tommy—which he released in October 2011. In August, Stud released another mixtape, Click, as a collaboration with fellow hip-hop artist Huey Mack.On May 13, 2013, Stud released his debut studio album Relief.On July 7, 2014, he released his second album Closer.On October 30, 2015, he released an 8-track mini-album, This Isn't the Album, a mix of previously released singles and new tracks.
On January 12, 2016, Stud released his third studio album, These Days, which includes a feature from New York Mets pitcher and former Duke teammate, Marcus Stroman.Mike most recently starred in a TV show on the Esquire Network called This Is Mike Stud. The show follows him and his crew around on his most recent Back2YouTour. The show premiered Tuesday, June 21, 2016.
In 2017, Stud was featured on "To the Grave" by American singer-songwriter Bea Miller, which is included on her EP, Chapter Three: Yellow and her second studio album, Aurora.
On November 12, 2018, Stud released his fourth album, 4TheHomies, which included 23 songs and features from Vory and Goody Grace. The album is very special to Stud, as the pinned tweet reads, "Hey guys. I released a new project last night. 23 songs that are basically the last 2 years of my life in music form. I made every song in my house. this shit couldn't be more me. I hope u guys have as much fun listening as we did making it."
In 2018, Stud began his Final Mike Stud Tour, leading many fans to believe it was his last tour ever. However, he clarified this by saying he was merely changing his stage name to "Mike" after the tour concluded.In 2021, the highs., was mike.'s first album released under his new stage name.


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===
Relief (2013)
Closer (2014)
These Days (2016)
4TheHomies (2018)
Uhyuready? (2019)
the highs. (2021) – No. 56 US Billboard 200
Why Not Us? (2022)
the lows. (TBA)


=== Mixtapes ===
A Toast to Tommy (2011)
Click with Huey Mack (2012)
#SundayStudTape (2013)
#SundayStudTapeVol.2 (2013)
It's Spring Break, Homie (2015)
This Isn't the Album (2015)


== References ==Kasseem Daoud Dean (born September 13, 1978), known professionally as Swizz Beatz, is an American record producer, rapper, disc jockey (DJ) and songwriter. Born and raised in the Bronx borough of New York City, Dean initially embarked on his musical career as a DJ. At the age of eighteen, he gained recognition in the music industry through his family's record label Ruff Ryders Entertainment, as well as his close affiliation with the label's flagship artist, Yonkers-based rapper DMX. Working with DMX as his producer, DJ and hype man helped Dean gain prominence as a high-profile personality in hip hop in the following years.
Dean later found a protégé in Philadelphia-based rapper Cassidy, whose success foresaw the launch of Dean's own label imprint, Full Surface Records in 2001. He went on to sign multiple artists to the label, including Eve, Mashonda and Bone Thugs-n-Harmony, among others. Dean released two albums under the label: a compilation titled Swizz Beatz Presents G.H.E.T.T.O. Stories (2002), and his solo debut studio album, One Man Band Man (2007). In November 2018, he released his second album, Poison. Alongside fellow producer Timbaland, Dean created and hosted the music-based webcast series Verzuz in 2020.
Dean has produced several hit singles for a number of prominent artists across various genres, such as hip hop, pop, soul, rock and R&B. With a career spanning over two decades, his catalog includes "Ruff Ryders' Anthem", "Party Up (Up in Here)" (DMX), "Gotta Man" (Eve), "Jigga My Nigga", "Girl's Best Friend" (Jay-Z), "Upgrade U", "Check on It", "Ring the Alarm" (Beyoncé), "Good Times" (Styles P), "Bring 'Em Out", "Swing Ya Rag" (T.I.), "Hotel", "I'm a Hustla" (Cassidy), "Touch It" (Busta Rhymes), and "Ultralight Beam" (Kanye West), among others.
Dean was named the first "Producer in Residence" at New York University in 2010. About.com ranked him number 27 on its list of the "Top 50 Greatest Hip-Hop Producers", and The Source included him on its 2008 list of the "20 greatest producers" of the last 20 years. Rapper and producer Kanye West referred to Dean as "the best rap producer of all time". Aside from music, Dean has also been involved in fashion design, art collection, and board directing. He has been a member of trustees at the Brooklyn Museum since 2015, and a creative director for the companies Monster Cable and Reebok. Dean is also known for his marriage to American singer Alicia Keys, with whom he has two children. The two were featured in their first cover shoot in 2018 for Cultured Magazine.


== Life and career ==


=== 1978–2006: Early life and career beginnings ===
He spent much of his childhood raised by his mother in the North East Bronx, where he first encountered hip hop. After obtaining the necessary equipment from his stepfather and uncles, he began DJing as a teenager and enjoyed a modicum of success. After relocating to Atlanta, Georgia, due to his repeated involvement in violent behavior at Harry S. Truman High School, he started to work for his uncles, Joaquin (Waah) and Darrin (Dee) Dean, who were co-CEOs of the Ruff Ryders record label. In his early work, he generally chose not to sample, instead using the Korg Trinity and Triton keyboards and seeking to accentuate the performance aspect of his music.
With his uncles Waah & Dee, as well as his aunt Chivon Dean, all involved with the Ruff Ryders record label, Swizz Beatz began to produce tracks at age 16, and was signed to Ruff Ryders Productions as a producer and songwriter. A year later he sold his first beat to Ruff Ryders artist DMX, which became his chart-topping single "Ruff Ryders' Anthem". The song was placed onto DMX's seminal 1998 debut album It's Dark and Hell is Hot. Dean then began producing major hip-hop songs released in 1998 such as "Banned from T.V." by Noreaga, "Money, Cash, Hoes" by Jay-Z and more. The following year, he produced most of the songs of the Ruff Ryders compilation album Ryde or Die Vol. 1, as well as the bulk of Eve's debut album. In 2001, in a joint venture with Clive Davis, Swizz Beatz established his own record label, Full Surface Records, which became a subsidiary of J Records. The first artist signed was Philadelphia-based rapper Cassidy.
When Dean released his first compilation album Swizz Beatz Presents G.H.E.T.T.O. Stories, in 2002, he began to get noticed for his production style and interesting ideas, as well as his protege and artist, Cassidy, who also started to gain recognition for his ability as well. The same year, Dean released two singles, "Guilty" and "Bigger Business", both of which charted on the Billboard Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart. Along with often being associated with Ruff Ryders and Roc-A-Fella Records, Dean began to expand his scope to include production of artists from more mainstream labels such as Elektra, Atlantic, Epic, Def Jam and Bad Boy Entertainment. His career largely grew from that point.


=== 2006–07: Full Surface and One Man Band Man ===

In February 2007, design duo Heatherette staged their Fall 2007 New York Fashion Week runway show, and Dean was asked to mix the music. In June 2007, Swizz Beatz produced and was featured on his Full Surface artist Cassidy's comeback single, "My Drink n My 2 Step", following a murder trial and a car accident. The song proved to be a hit, reaching the Top 40 of the US Billboard Hot 100 chart. On August 21, 2007, Dean released his solo debut studio album, One Man Band Man. The album, preceded by the lead singles "It's Me Bitches" and "Money in the Bank", debuted at number seven on the US Billboard 200 and sold 45,000 copies in its first week.On October 19, 2007, he launched a contest called "Share the Studio", presented by Music Video 2.0 and The Source magazine. The contest was intended to be a continuation of the work from his debut album.Later that same year, Dean signed former Ruff Ryders cohorts and longtime friends, Drag-On and Eve, to Full Surface Records. He also signed legendary Cleveland-based hip hop group Bone Thugs-n-Harmony, where they later released their seventh studio album Strength & Loyalty in May, which Dean executive produced.In a December 2007 interview with Format Magazine, Dean stated that he was already working on his second studio album, at the time under the title Life After the Party.


=== 2008–18: Monster Music Group ===
In 2008, Dean began working on his second studio album. In late 2007, in an interview with Format Magazine he had announced the title as Life After the Party saying: "The opportunities that I've got from doing my album (One Man Band Man) are much bigger than just producing. A lot of things came from me being able to put a voice to my face. It was me just expressing myself and having the opportunity to – it was the one man band. And now I'm doing part two, which is Life After the Party."In March 2009, Dean released a song titled "You Stay on My Mind". On April 24, 2009, he released a promotional song for Hennessy Black, titled "When I Step in the Club". A music video, directed by Hype Williams, was also released. In 2009, Dean produced many popular singles including "Nasty Girl" by Ludacris featuring Plies, "Who's Real" by Jadakiss featuring OJ da Juiceman, "Million Bucks" by Maino, "Million Dollar Bill" by Whitney Houston, "I Can Transform Ya" by Chris Brown featuring Lil Wayne, and "On to the Next One" by Jay-Z.On February 12, 2010, he and 81 other artists including Kanye West, Lil Wayne, Justin Bieber, Miley Cyrus, Jamie Foxx, Will.i.am, and Usher, debuted "We Are the World 25 for Haiti" during the Opening Ceremonies of the Winter Olympics in Vancouver. Inspired by GOOD Fridays the 2010 weekly series of free mp3s from Kanye West, Swizz Beatz launched his own series titled Monster Mondays later that year. The first offering, "DJ Play that Beat", featured Estelle, and was released on October 25. Other Monster Monday tracks feature Rakim, Pusha T, DMX, Busta Rhymes, Pharrell and many more.Dean's second album in the works had been renamed on three occasions: initially, the album was renamed King Issues, and was later retitled The Perception of Greatness. After initially turning to fans to help decide on an album title, Dean eventually announced in August 2010, while in a New York City recording session with Mary J. Blige, that the title would be Haute Living, as "it's the perfect phrase to state what he's all about". In November 2010, Dean previewed the album and confirmed guest appearances from Bono, Travis Barker, Kanye West, Lil Wayne, Jay-Z, Lenny Kravitz, Mary J. Blige and John Legend, as well as his wife Alicia Keys.In April 2011, in an exclusive listening session with Rap-Up.com, Dean premiered fourteen tracks set to appear on the album, including "V.I.P. Chillin" and also several previously unheard songs, including "Dance Like a White Girl" and "Instructions". He also premiered unfinished versions of several music videos made for the album, revealing that the Reebok-commissioned video for "International Party" cost $1.4 million to shoot, and that the video for "You Stay on My Mind" was shot in Dubai: he also revealed that he persuaded the Sheikh to let him use the airspace for only a dollar. Dean announced that he was planning to release the album on September 13, to coincide with his birth date. Rather than being released under his own imprint, the album is set to be released under his legal contract with Everest Entertainment/Atlantic Records/Warner Music Group, who signed the rapper in August 2010.
His first Grammy Award came in 2011, awarded in the category of Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group for a track titled "On to the Next One" teaming him with Jay-Z. The first promotional single from Haute Living was titled "Everyday (Coolin')", features a verse from Eve, was produced by Joe Lindsay, and was released through monstermondays.com on March 28, 2011. In an April 2011 interview with Paper Mag, Dean revealed that a few yet-to-be-released special collaborations would appear on the album, including one titled "Skyscrapers" featuring Kanye West and Bono: "We got this song–it's me, Bono and Kanye on this one song called 'Skyscrapers'. I recorded with Kanye in the studio and then I recorded with Bono in this actual studio right here. Mary J. Blige is on the album too; John Legend. But they're all on the album in super amazing ways. It's not like a compilation–it's a nice mixture of creativity. I had no boundaries with it; I had great partners on the album–Reebok was supporting me."In May 2011, during an interview with BBC Radio 1Xtra's DJ Semtex, Swizz Beatz announced the release of his upcoming third solo album Haute Living, would be released on his birthday, September 13, 2011. In July 2011, Swizz Beatz said instead of releasing all of the songs at once, he would release the tracks over an extended period of time: "Let me clarify: Haute Living is still coming, but as far as releasing all on one day, I'm not doing that no more," he said. "I want to just drop singles from Haute Living instead of 'I'm coming on September 13.' I'm like, 'You know what? Let me make every song an event, instead of just that one day being an event.'"Dean and his Monster Music Group signed a joint venture with Imagem Music USA. In a press release, the artist confirmed his excitement at his upcoming partnership with Richard Stumpf and the entire group over at Imagem Music, saying: "This partnership will enable me to further develop my group of talented producers and also introduce many new producers and writers to the world". Protégé Musicman Ty and Naki "Snagz" Levy were the first acts to sign with Monster Music Publishing, and on May 21, 2011, he further confirmed that Dr. Dre was working on the album with him.
In March 2012, Dean announced that he would be releasing a mixtape titled Limitless, featuring guest appearances from DMX, Nas, Rick Ross, The LOX and ASAP Rocky, the latter of whom is featured on the first single, "Street Knock". On March 22, 2012, "Street Knock" featuring ASAP Rocky was premiered on "The Angie Martinez Show". In October 2012, at the 2012-2013 New York Knicks Season Tip-Off event at the Beacon Theatre on 73rd Street and Broadway, special guest Swizz Beatz performed a 10-minute medley of his hits, alongside the New York Knicks' City Dancers and premiered the starting line-up theme song for the upcoming season, which he produced. On November 2, 2012, he released a new single titled "Everyday Birthday", featuring Chris Brown and Ludacris. Dean produced the song with Jukebox. On August 23, 2013, he released "Hands Up", a new single featuring Lil Wayne, Nicki Minaj, Rick Ross, and 2 Chainz. On October 21, 2014, he released "Freaky", a new single featuring American rapper La'Vega.In May 2014, Dean was inducted into the Bronx Walk of Fame, where he received a street named in his honor, called "Swizz Beatz Street".In September 2015, it was announced that Dean would host the third annual Global Spin Awards.In June 2017, Dean and One Man Kru appeared as the only two American talents on the 6th season of popular South Korean hip hop TV show "Show Me The Money".


=== 2018–present: Poison and Verzuz ===
In May 2018, Dean released the song "It's Okayyy", ahead of the release of his then upcoming album Poison. He recorded 70 songs and used 10 for the album. Poison features Kendrick Lamar, Lil Wayne, Pusha T, Nas, Young Thug, The Lox, 2 Chainz, among others. In July 2018, Dean said he worked with Nas on the latter's follow-up to his 2018 release Nasir. Dean released  "Pistol on My Side" featuring Lil Wayne from Poison, along with its music video, on September 14, 2018.In March 2020, Dean, along with Timbaland, launched the highly popular Verzuz Instagram webcast series. In 2021, for their work on Verzuz, they both appeared on the Time 100, Time's annual list of the 100 most influential people in the world.That same year, Dean became series music producer for the ABC TV show Queens starring Brandy, Eve, Naturi Naughton and Nadine Velazquez. Queens premiered on October 19, 2021.


== Other ventures ==


=== Fashion designer ===
In 2003, he became a partner involved in the popular clothing company Kidrobot, a creator and retailer of limited-edition art toys and clothing.On Twitter in 2010, Dean revealed his new sneaker line with Reebok.


=== Art ===
Dean is an avid art collector and connoisseur actively projecting and displaying his taste via Instagram. The curated collection of favourites was first introduced at SCOPE Art Show Miami Beach and has since become known as The Dean Collection, it includes work from emerging and well established artists including KAWS, Keith Haring, Cleon Peterson, Ernest Zacharevic and Erik Jones.Dean and Keys are co-chairs of the Gordon Parks Foundation, which permanently preserves the work of Gordon Parks, a pioneering photographer, filmmaker, musician and activist. The couple acquired what is now the largest private holding of Parks' images and what is now part of the Dean Collection, the couple's philanthropic organization and family collection of international contemporary art. In the summer of 2018, Dean and Keys were featured in Cultured Magazine for their first joint cover, where they delved into Parks' works and the Dean Collection in more depth.Dean also paints in his free time. He donates the money he earns from his paintings to the Children's Cancer & Blood Foundation.


=== Brand promoter ===
In 2010, Dean became involved in the design and launch of the Aston Martin Rapide. In 2011, Swizz Beatz became the official face of Lotus cars until CEO Dany Bahar left the company. Subsequently, Swizz Beatz returned to Aston Martin for 2013.In early 2013, Dean invested in and joined the board of Monster, and became involved in product management and marketing activities. Monster products that he is promoting include the Monster GODJ and the Monster 24K headphones.Dean currently sits as the Vice President - Sports Style Marketing, Design, and Brand Music Development for global footwear and apparel giant Reebok.


=== Performing Arts Center ===
On August 9, 2019, it was announced that Dean and his wife, singer Alicia Keys, are planning to transform a large piece of property in Macedon, New York into a music paradise of sorts. The couple wants to make a performing arts center and recording studio out of the former Jindal Films center which includes 111 acres and 3 buildings.


=== Camel racing ===
On October 22, 2020, Dean became the first American to win a camel race in Saudi Arabia after he won his first race with his team, Kaseem abu Nasser (Saudi Bronx).


== Personal life ==
Dean is Muslim. He and singer Mashonda Tifrere began dating in 1998. Their first pregnancy ended in a stillbirth in 2000. In 2000, Dean's son, Nasir Dior, who is a model and a musician known as Note Marcato, with Nichole Levy was born. Dean and Tifrere married in 2004. In December 2006, their son, Kasseem Dean Jr. was born. Dean also has a daughter Nicole, born in May 2008, with UK-based singer Jahna Sabastian, whom he met in 2007. Dean found out about his daughter a year after her birth. In 2008, Dean and Tifrere announced their break-up. According to Dean, they had been separated nine or 10 months by June 2008. Their divorce was finalized in May 2010, citing irreconcilable differences.During this time, Dean dated Alicia Keys, whom he has known since they were teens. They announced they were engaged and expecting their first child in May 2010. At the time of the 2010 FIFA World Cup, the couple took part of a union and had their unborn child blessed in a Zulu ceremony, which took place in the Illovo suburb of Johannesburg, South Africa. They married on July 31, 2010 in a private ceremony near the Mediterranean Sea. Keys gave birth to their first son, Egypt Daoud Dean, in October 2010. Their second son, Genesis Ali Dean, was born in December 2014. Dean contributed to Tifrere's 2018 book on co-parenting with him and Keys.In 2012, Dean was appointed the Global Ambassador for New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation (HHC).In April 2014, Dean was accepted into Harvard Business School's Owner/President Management executive program. In October 2017, Dean shared a video on social media, celebrating the final days leading up to his graduation: "It's been a blessing coming from the Bronx, going to Harvard. A lot of people were saying why would you go to school? It's never too late to get your education, further your education." He continued by encouraging others to seek education as well. "Knowledge is power. It don't have to be an Ivy league school. Just as long as you're doing your thing, do your thing." In November 2017, Dean confirmed he had graduated from the OPM program.In March 2016, Dean announced that his son Egypt was a credited producer on Kendrick Lamar's compilation, Untitled Unmastered.


=== Involvement with Jho Low ===
In 2012, Dean began associating with Malaysian businessman Jho Low, alleged to be the mastermind of the 1MDB scandal. Dean appeared at a variety of Low's parties, and became known as one of Low's inner circle of American celebrities, including Leonardo DiCaprio, Jamie Foxx, and Paris Hilton. Jho Low was known to give lavish gifts or cash payments to his celebrity friends and Dean received an $800k payment to attend Low's lavish 31st birthday party. Dean is also credited with helping Low navigate both the art world, and the music industry in the U.S., where Low acquired a number of renowned paintings and a stake in EMI music publishing, which was ultimately recovered by the U.S. Department of Justice and estimated at a value of $415 million.


== Discography ==

Studio albumsOne Man Band Man (2007)
Poison (2018)


== Filmography ==
I Tried (2007)
Dumb and Dumber To (2014)
Empire (2015)


== Awards and nominations ==
ASCAP Award
2020, ASCAP Voice of the Culture Award for VERZUZ
BET Awards
2020, Honoree Recipient, "Shine A Light" Award for VERZUZ
BET Hip Hop Awards
2010, Producer Of the Year (won)
Grammy Awards
2018, Producers & Engineers Wing Award, for outstanding contributions to music (co-recipient, Alicia Keys)Urban Music Awards
2009, Best Producer (won)
Webby Award
2020, Category: Special Achievement - 'Break The Internet' Award, for the Instagram webcast VERZUZ, (co-recipient, Timbaland)
2014 Bronx Walk of Fame


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website
The Dean Collection
Swizz Beatz at AllMusic
Swizz Beatz discography at Discogs
Swizz Beatz discography at MusicBrainzEmmanuel Chuckwudi Afam Efuna Okoli (born October 13, 1998), best known by his previous stage name Yhaunai Takiyal, and now AugustWntr, is an experimental multi-genre music producer, electronic musician, and rapper from Baltimore, Maryland.
AugustWntr has released two studio albums Gold (2015) and Nature Theory (2016). He has produced in various genres, ranging from trap to pop. He also contributed remixes for artists such as Drake and Flying Lotus.
In 2013, Okoli began rapping under the persona Azyn Porter. He kept this from his fans for several months, finally revealing his identity a few months after the release of his first freestyle rap mixtape, Anti-Adventure.


== Early life ==
AugustWntr was born Emmanuel Chuckwudi Afam Efuna Okoli on October 13, 1998, in Baltimore, Maryland. He has switched his name several times thought to be due to the throes of his youth.


== Career ==


=== 2012–2013: Alphasquad ===
While in transition from middle to High school, music classes taught Okoli to make music and soon got him into music production. His experimentation in beat-making began to produce trap type beats infused with boom bap hip-hop and cartoon network inspiration.
Around this time, he was forming his hip hop label/group Alphasquad with group mates Zae Abyss, Lvrd Blasian, Zarkito, and Monte G. Days were spent in their houses recording, and nights were spent producing and working on the music that would become the makings of his first few EPs and mixtapes. AugustWntr was (for a time) the only full-time producer in alphasquad, while the rest of his group consisted of rappers. This factor became the main reason for his first few mixtapes to consist of strictly freestyle rap.
In 2013, group mate Lvrd Blasian released his first mixtape Road to Riches, much to local approval. This release would be Astro's final release under his old alias, Lvrd Blasian. This caused Lvrd Blasian to drop out of Alphasquad until early 2015. Following Blasian's drop out of music and Alphasquad Zae Abyss and AugustWntr decided to both be the frontmen of the group.
His first release Anti-Adventure was released in the absence of former frontman Lvrd Blasian followed by Xenon Lean and Neon Blossoms in the following year.


=== 2014–2015: Xenon Lean and Off Center ===
Xenon Lean would go on to be the second mixtape that AugustWntr would release under the name "Azyn Porter" and was given more attention to detail as it seemed that AugustWntr found his style.


=== 2015–2016: Gold, GoodMorning, and Nature Theory ===
Gold is AugustWntr's first instrumental studio album composed of various experimental and electronic themes. AugustWntr released several EPs following Gold's release. Despite that Gold was a free album, $50 was made from it thanks to close friend and youtuber, DBoy9|IconSean. DBoy would use AugustWntr's music for his gameplay videos that'll be uploaded on his page. Gold at the moment is not on AugustWntr's bandcamp, but will be re-uploaded after the release of Gold II. GoodMorning was dropped a month later after Gold. GoodMorning is consist of the same genres as Gold, but AugustWntr himself thinks that GoodMorning was way better than gold. Others think that Gold was better. AugustWntr's Nature Theory is his second studio album composed of his classic experimental sounds with a nature-inspired influence. Nature Theory was also the last album to be put out under AugustWntr's recently former name, Yhaunai.


=== 2017: Gold II ===
Gold II is AugustWntr's squeal album to gold. As of right now, the album will consist of mainly electronic, hip hop and trap instrumentals. The release date is currently unknown, but it is set to be this year. This will also be AugustWntr's first album that will be sold in online music stores such as: iTunes, Google Play, Spotify, etc.


== Influences and style ==
AugustWntr's influences include Flying Lotus, Wondagurl, Eestbound, Kaytranada, and XXXTENTACION. While his style is a mixture hip-hop, trap, electronic, and experimental music.


== Discography ==


=== As Yhanuai Takiyal ===
Gold (2015)
Goodmorning (2015)
Xeriscape (2016)
Nature Theory (2016)As AugustWntr

Gold II (2017)


=== As Azyn Porter ===
Anti-Adventure (2013)
Anti-Adventure Deluxe (2014)
Xenon Lean (2014)
Neon Blossoms (2014)
Vil.Lain (2017)


== References ==Teyana Me Shay Jacqueli Shumpert (née Taylor; born December 10, 1990) is an American singer, actress, model, dancer and choreographer. In 2007, she signed a record deal with Pharrell Williams' Star Trak Entertainment imprint. Afterwards, she choreographed the music video for "Ring the Alarm" by Beyoncé. Taylor would then appear on MTV's My Super Sweet 16, prior to the 2008 release of her debut single "Google Me". Soon after, she landed (uncredited) guest features on the songs "Dark Fantasy" and "Hell of a Life" by Kanye West, from his album My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy (2010).
In 2011, Taylor starred as Sabrina in the Tyler Perry film Madea's Big Happy Family. After asking to be released from her recording contract with Star Trak, she signed to Kanye West's GOOD Music label through Def Jam; she appeared on the GOOD Music compilation album Cruel Summer (2012), which reached number two on the Billboard 200 chart. In 2014, Taylor released her debut album VII, and followed it with the studio albums K.T.S.E. (2018) and The Album (2020), with the latter charting in the top ten of the Billboard 200.
As an actress, Taylor has acted in the VH1 television series The Breaks, Lee Daniels' Star, and the Amazon Prime film Coming 2 America. Additionally, she starred in the VH1 reality show Teyana and Iman with her husband, basketball player Iman Shumpert. Taylor has collaborated with musicians such as Lauryn Hill, Erykah Badu, and Missy Elliott, and has co-written songs for several artists, including Usher, Chris Brown, and Omarion.


== Early life ==
Teyana Taylor was born on December 10, 1990, to Nikki Taylor and Tito Smith, in Harlem, New York City. She is of African American and Trinidadian descent. Taylor is her mother's only child, while her father has two sons and another daughter from a different relationship. Her mother raised her and is currently her manager.


== Career ==


=== 2006–2011: Early career ===
In September 2006, 15-year-old Teyana Taylor was credited as the choreographer on the music video for American entertainer Beyoncé's hit single, "Ring the Alarm". In January 2007, Taylor was offered a contract to join American recording artist and record producer Pharrell Williams' Star Trak Entertainment label, through Interscope Records. In February 2007, Taylor first entered into the public sphere through an episode on MTV's My Super Sweet Sixteen, a show depicting over-the-top birthday parties for rich—and typically “spoiled” and confrontational—teenagers. In 2007, Taylor appeared in the music video for Jay-Z's single, "Blue Magic", where she can be seen dancing and popping.In February 2008, Taylor released her commercial debut single, "Google Me". The song was released as the lead single from her full-length debut mixtape, titled From a Planet Called Harlem. The mixtape, released August 16, 2009, features production from Jazze Pha, Pharrell, Mad Scientist, Frost, Shondre and Hit-Boy, among others. Sing365 says that the record’s "…[a] mix of throwback break beats, futuristic boom bap, and melodic renderings is the perfect backdrop for the starlet's musical mayhem." "Google Me" debuted at number 90 on US Billboard's Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs. The mixtape was also released for free download, billed as "the mixtape before her debut album".In August 2010, Taylor expanded her career into acting, appearing in the sequel to Stomp the Yard, Stomp the Yard: Homecoming. She also appeared on the debut episode of House of Glam on Oxygen in October 2010.
In 2010, just hours before Kanye West's fifth album My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy was due to be turned in, West called Taylor into the studio to look over some of her fashion pieces. While in the studio, Taylor was determined to make an appearance on West's album. She purposely hummed along with the tracks he played for her, to get his attention. He eventually took notice, and asked to put her vocals on a few tracks, notably "Dark Fantasy" and "Hell of a Life". Upon recalling the experience of recording "Dark Fantasy", Taylor stated that "at the time it was pretty empty, just verses." She remembers that West "put [her] in another room by [herself] and said, 'Go'." Taylor came back with the "intro and chorus," and "did all the scratches and the cuts [herself]." She admitted that she was nervous upon letting West hear her contributions to the tracks, trying to cover her nervousness by stating that she "hadn't been in the studio for so long."In 2010, Taylor contributed on one of GOOD Music's GOOD Friday tracks, "Christmas In Harlem". The track was released as a shortened version of the single to the iTunes Store on December 17, 2010, and features guest appearances from American rapper Cyhi the Prynce as well as Kanye West. In 2010, Taylor, alongside fellow rapper Bow Wow, were offered roles for Tyler Perry's play-turned-film Madea's Big Happy Family, the fifth installment in Perry's series. The film was released on April 22, 2011. Taylor soon delved back into music, and was featured on the hook of "Party Tonight" alongside fellow rappers Randyn Julius, Jim Jones and Cam'ron. Randyn Julius was later enlisted by Junior Reid to do his bars for the remix of the track.


=== 2012–2018: GOOD Music, debut and K.T.S.E. ===
In January 2012, it was announced Taylor would be granted her release from the contract with Interscope and Star Trak. Taylor has stated that she and Star Trak founder Pharrell Williams have remained amicable since the end of their business relationship. She has credited him as a "big brother", and sees her early signing to Star Trak as a "blessing." Taylor has stated on many occasions that her release from the label was necessary, as she wanted to have a feeling of independence in the music industry. In an interview with DJ Skee, Taylor mentioned that “when [she] was signed for six years, [she] felt like she couldn't do [anything]”, “couldn't prove to [her] fans that [she] had the talent”, and “couldn't sing from [her] heart.”
As an independent artist upon her release, she had begun preparing her second record, a mixtape titled The Misunderstanding of Teyana Taylor. The mixtape drew influences from 1990s R&B legends like Lauryn Hill and Mary J. Blige. The mixtape was released in early 2012, and was preceded by the release of "Make Your Move", featuring rapper Wale, and "D.U.I.", featuring Jadakiss & Fabolous, which was released on February 25, 2012. More positive reviews of the latter track noted that "The Harlem songstress channels Janet Jackson as she glides over the smooth Hit-Boy-produced beat with her airy vocals, while fellow New Yorkers Fabolous and Jadakiss ride shotgun".After taking some time to find herself as an independent artist, Taylor signed a joint-venture deal with Kanye West's label GOOD Music through Island-Def Jam on June 14, 2012. As part of GOOD Music, Taylor appeared on the GOOD Music compilation album Cruel Summer, released September 18, 2012. She provides vocals for the opening track "To the World", with Kanye West and R. Kelly, provides the hook and chorus for "Sin City", which features John Legend, Cyhi the Prynce, Malik Yusef and Travis Scott, and also duets with John Legend on a song titled "Bliss". Taylor and Legend's duet on the album was highly praised, with Erika Ramirez of Billboard noting that "Taylor's beautifully brash voice ... illuminates in the electric-guitar heavy, Hudson Mohawke-produced 'Bliss'."In addition to being featured on the Cruel Summer compilation, Taylor soon began the process of recording her major-label debut album, to be released eventually through GOOD Music and Island Def Jam. On July 27, 2014, via Twitter, Taylor announced the title of her debut studio album to be VII, and revealed it would be released on November 4, through Def Jam and GOOD Music. The album debuted at number 19 on the Billboard 200, selling 16,000 copies in the United States in its first week, while topping the R&B/Hip-Hop Albums chart.Taylor was set to be a judge on the eighth season of the American competitive dance reality show America's Best Dance Crew, with its series debut on July 29, 2015 on MTV. On August 25, Taylor released The Cassette Tape 1994, paying tribute to the iconic 90s sound in music by including many samples from 90s hits.On June 17, 2016, Taylor released her single "Freak On", featuring guest vocals from Chris Brown and production by DJ Mustard. It samples "Freak Like Me" by Adina Howard. Taylor announced that it would be the lead single from her upcoming second studio album. On August 28, 2016, at the MTV Video Music Awards, Kanye West debuted the music video for his new single "Fade", which featured a sweat-dripping, athletic Taylor performing a rigorous solo dance routine, in nothing more than short shorts and a simple top; the dynamic and detailed choreography drew considerable praise, and comparisons were made to Jennifer Beals’ iconic dance scene from the film Flashdance (1983). One year later, in 2017, Taylor’s dancing in the music video would go on to earn her the “Best Choreography” award at the same ceremony. The video, directed by Eli Russell Linnetz, also featured an appearance by Taylor’s husband, Iman Shumpert.
Taylor's album K.T.S.E., an acronym for "keep that same energy," was the last of G.O.O.D. Music's seven-song album rollout and was released on June 22, 2018. An updated version of the album was supposed to be released, but Taylor announced that plans were canceled for it.


=== 2019-present: The Album and other collaborations ===
Taylor released a collaboration single with fellow R&B singer Kehlani called "Morning" in November 2019. On December 6, 2019, Taylor released the single "We Got Love". On May 7, 2020, Taylor announced that her third studio album is titled The Album and would be released sometime in June 2020. It was released on June 19, with the 23-track album featuring guest appearances by Erykah Badu, Kehlani, Lauryn Hill, Future, Rick Ross, Quavo, and Missy Elliott. It debuted at number 8 on the Billboard 200, earning Taylor her first top 10 album.On December 4, 2020, Taylor seemingly announced her retirement from making music via her Instagram page. A few days later, she explained the post was directed at her record label as she continued clarifying her frustration with their lack of support,  "Baby, I gotta do it for my mental health. I have to do it for my emotional health. I have to do it for my kids, so I can stay alive for my kids. Until I'm free, until I can get [Def Jam] to release me, yes I want to retire." She later stated much of the frustration leading to retirement could be traced back to her label undervaluing her, but she would not be retiring for good.


== Other ventures ==
In 2013, Taylor signed a deal to design and release two pairs of sneakers with Adidas. The first pair released were the Harlem GLC's which hit stores February 16 the same year. According to Adidas Global Director of Entertainment and Influence Marketing, Jonathan Wexler, Taylor currently holds the record for fastest selling sneakers in Adidas Originals history. She is currently focused on designing and releasing her second pair of sneakers with the brand. In March 2017, Teyana Taylor launched her "Fade 2 Fit" Workout Program, a ninety-day workout which centers around dance and fitness routines. The inspiration for this program and the incorporated dance elements come from her work in the music video for Kanye West's "Fade". She also released a line of workout apparel, also called Fade2Fit. In May 2019, Taylor featured and directed the music video for Lil Durk's remix of Home Body in his new album Signed to the Streets 3.In 2022, Taylor competed in season seven of The Masked Singer as "Firefly" of Team Good. During the finals, Taylor was declared the winner. At 31 years old, she became the youngest "winner" in the show's history.


== Personal life ==
In 2015, after she went into early labor, her husband Iman Shumpert assisted in her delivery of their baby girl.On September 20, 2016, on The Wendy Williams Show, Taylor revealed that she and Shumpert had "maybe" married secretly, but the couple did not actually wed until October 1, 2016, approximately two weeks after the interview. On June 12, 2020, Taylor confirmed her second pregnancy in her music video for her 2020 single "Wake Up Love".On September 17, 2023, the couple announced their separation.
The following day, Taylor announced via Instagram that she and Iman had been separated for months.


== Discography ==

VII (2014)
K.T.S.E. (2018)
The Album (2020)


== Filmography ==


=== Film ===


=== Television ===


== Awards and nominations ==


== References ==


== Notes ==


== External links ==
Teyana Taylor at IMDb
Teyana Taylor at AllMusic
Teyana Taylor on MySpace
Teyana Taylor at Fashion WeekTyler-Justin Anthony Sharpe (born August 26, 2002), known professionally as Lil Tecca, is an American rapper and singer. He rose to mainstream fame with the release of his 2019 single "Ransom", which peaked at number 4 on the Billboard Hot 100. The single was included on his debut mixtape We Love You Tecca (2019), which peaked at number 4 on the Billboard 200 and contained the follow-up singles "Love Me" and "Did It Again". His debut album, Virgo World (2020) debuted at number 10 on the Billboard 200 and was followed up with his second and third albums, We Love You Tecca 2 (2021) and Tec (2023).


== Early life ==
Tyler-Justin Anthony Sharpe was born on August 26, 2002, in the borough of Queens New York City to Jamaican immigrants. He was raised in the Springfield Gardens neighborhood of Queens, but later relocated to Cedarhurst on Long Island. From a young age, Sharpe had aspirations of being in the NBA, but around the age of 12, he turned his attention towards pursuing a career in music. He attended Lawrence High School.


== Career ==
When Tecca was nine years old, he catered to his interest in music by rapping with his friends over his mic on his Xbox. They would make diss tracks directed toward each other, two of which were uploaded to SoundCloud years ago, but has since been taken down.His first track to gain some popularity, "Tectri", was made in collaboration with his friend, Lil Gummybear, and was released in early 2017. Other preliminary tracks of his include "Callin". Just a year later, Tecca's career began to take off with his hit single, "Ransom", which was originally uploaded on Cole Bennett's Lyrical Lemonade YouTube channel on May 22, 2019. The song peaked at number 4 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart and has received over 1 billion plays on Spotify and over 400 million views on YouTube.On August 30, 2019, Tecca released his debut mixtape, titled We Love You Tecca. The mixtape peaked at number 4 on the US Billboard 200.After the release of multiple singles in 2020, Tecca released his debut album, Virgo World, on September 18, 2020.On April 6, 2021, Tecca released the single "Show Me Up". On May 6, 2021, he released the single "Never Left", which peaked at number 54 on the US Billboard Hot 100.On August 6, 2021, Tecca released the single "Repeat It" with American rapper Gunna. On August 27, 2021, Tecca released his second studio album, We Love You Tecca 2, the sequel to his debut mixtape, We Love You Tecca. He later went on the Tecca Loves You Tour with tana, Bktherula, and yvngxchris.In 2022, Tecca released a collaboration "Let Love Go" with English singer Mabel as part of Mabel's second studio album About Last Night.
For 2023 Lil Tecca returned with a string of singles before releasing his third album "TEC" on September 22nd.
Tecca is a co-owner of Galactic Records. Galactic's roster of artists consists of Tecca himself, tana, Tokin, and WAV.


== Discography ==

Virgo World (2020)
We Love You Tecca 2 (2021)
Tec (2023)


== Awards and nominations ==


== Notes ==


== References ==Toi Crystal Jackson, known professionally as Sweet Tee, is an American rapper who was signed to Profile Records in the 1980s.  Her first single in 1986 was the hit "It's My Beat" featuring DJ Jazzy Joyce. Sweet Tee would be part of the crew of producer Hurby Azor’s "Idol Makers". She scored minor chart success with her debut album, "It's Tee Time", in 1988, which peaked at No. 31 on the US Billboard R&B chart. She scored four chart hit singles from her debut album. These included "I Got da Feelin'" (No. 48 US R&B, No. 31 UK Singles Chart), "On the Smooth Tip" (No. 36 US R&B) and "Why Did It Have to Be Me". In the UK, "It's Like That Y'All" peaked in the Top 40. JMJ Records a subsidiary of Def Jam Recordings signed Sweet Tee and in 1995, Sweet Tee released the single "What's up, Star?" under the moniker Suga. The song appeared on Russell Simmons presents The Show: The Soundtrack. UK-based act Tin Tin Out's 1994 debut single, "The Feeling", was a piano-based house track that sampled Sweet Tee's lyrics from "I Got da Feelin'". The song reached No. 32 in the UK Singles Chart. It is credited to Tin Tin Out featuring Sweet Tee.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===


=== Compilation albums ===


=== Mixtapes ===


=== As lead artist ===


=== Featured singles ===


=== Guest appearances ===


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Allmusic Profile Album and singles info, chart info and music video links.
Sweet Tee on InstagramDaniel Domingo Carrillo (born October 8, 1982), better known by his stage name Termanology, is an American rapper and record producer. He first gained major attention with the 2006 single "Watch How It Go Down". A solo album, Politics as Usual, was released in 2008. He has made a number of collaborative albums, such as 1982 (released in 2010) and is known also for his prolific mixtape output. He is of Puerto Rican and French descent.


== Life and career ==
In collaboration with the New Hampshire producer DC the MIDI Alien, Carrillo independently released the album Out the Gate in 2005. The single "This Is Hip Hop" attracted the attention of The Source, which featured the rapper in its much-coveted "Unsigned Hype" column.
A friendship with the Gang Starr Foundation member Krumbsnatcha led to a meeting with DJ Premier, who was a fan of "This Is Hip Hop". Termanology's DJ Premier-produced 2006 single "Watch How It Go Down" generated considerable national and international  interest, including an appearance in XXL's "Show & Prove" column.A remix of Christina Aguilera's song "Back in the Day", featuring Termanology, was released in 2006.The debut solo album release Politics as Usual on Nature Sounds in 2008 gathered together many of hip hop's most revered producers as DJ Premier was joined by names like Pete Rock, Large Professor, Easy Mo Bee, and Buckwild. It was well received by critics, though many reviewers noted it lacked the focused aggression throughout that "Watch How It Go Down" had promised.The rapper's mixtapes have also attracted critical attention. These include Hood Politics Vols. I–7 his project over J Dilla beats, If Heaven Was A Mile Away; a collection of fifty of his verses, 50 Bodies; and the compilation of his mixtape cuts, Jackin' for Beats.ST. Da Squad  is the self-titled collaborative effort with his group ST. Da Squad. A selection of his featured appearances with other artists can be found on Da Cameo King. In 2009, he wrote and recorded an original song, titled "Here in Liberty City", for the soundtrack to the video game Grand Theft Auto: The Lost and Damned. The mixtape Time Machine, released in late 2009, was described by the artist as "somewhere between a mixtape and an album".1982 was released in October 2010, and is a joint release with producer Statik Selektah. On June 7, 2011, Termanology dropped the mixtape Cameo King II, which is a sequel to Da Cameo King. Later that year he and Ea$y Money made another collaborative project, entitled S.T.R.E.E.T. (Speakin' Thru Real Experience Every Time). In early 2012, Termanology released 50 Bodies Pt. 4 which was hosted by Statik Selektah, D-Stroy, and DJ Deadeye. A couple of months later he and Statik Selektah (1982), released their sophomore album called 2012. The video for Lights Down was shot in Japan and was featured on MTV Jams. In November 2012, Termanology & Lil Fame of the legendary rap group M.O.P., made a collaborative album called Fizzyology, a play on both of their stage names combined.
Hood Politics 7 was released in April 2013 which was promoted on MTV News "Mixtape Mondays". He performed his verse from "Up Every Night (Remix)", which features Kid Ink and Cory Gunz. On October 8, he released his album G.O.Y.A. (Gunz Or Yay Available) which was entirely produced by Shortfyuz. The first single was "Straight Off The Block" which featured DJ Kay Slay, Sheek Louch, and frequent collaborator Lil Fame. "Judo" was the third single that featured N.O.R.E. To keep the buzz going on the G.O.Y.A. brand, they released an EP the following year on 4/20 called Mas G.O.Y.A.. The first single was "Front Door" which featured Sean Price. Late 2014, Termanology released the album Shut Up And Rap, with the bulk of production by Billy Loman. The singles included "The War Begins" (featuring Chris Rivers, H Blanco, & Inspectah Deck), "I Fucks With You" (featuring Lumidee and Cyrus DeShield), "Get Away" (featuring Skyzoo, Torae & Reks).
On July 7, 2016, Termanology released his first single for his new album More Politics, "We're Both Wrong" featuring Saigon and produced by Q-Tip.
On April 8, 2022 Termanology and Paul Wall released their joint album Start 2 Finish


== Discography ==

Studio albums

Out the Gate (with DC the Midi Alien) (2006)
Politics as Usual (2008)
1982 (with Statik Selektah as 1982) (2010)
2012 (with Statik Selektah as 1982) (2012)
Fizzyology (with Lil' Fame) (2012)
G.O.Y.A. (Gunz Or Yay Available) (2013)
Shut Up And Rap (2014)
More Politics (2016)
Anti-Hero (with Slaine) (2017)
Bad Decisions (2018)
Still 1982 (with Statik Selektah as 1982) (2018)
Set in Stone (with Dame Gease) (2019)
Vintage Horns (2019)
The Quarantine (with Statik Selektah as 1982) (2020)
360 (with Amadeus360 The Beat King) (2021)
Start 2 Finish (with Paul Wall) (2022)
Determination (2022)
Rapping With My Friends (2022)


== References ==


== External links ==

Official websiteBenjamin David Goldberg (born September 24, 1998), known professionally as Token, is an American rapper from Salem, Massachusetts.
He has appeared on Sway’s Friday's Fire Cipher and has a catalog of videos on YouTube. His most recent video, "Ain't It Funny", uses a sample of his son playing the recorder.


== Early life ==
Ben Goldberg was born and raised in Marblehead, Massachusetts. He was introduced to hip-hop music at age sixteen by Justin Bieber.  His mother, Leslie Goldberg, described him as having incidents of "explosive anger". In his younger years, Goldberg was often sent home from school by his teachers because of this. Additionally, he had difficulty in understanding expressive language. Goldberg was eventually diagnosed with autism. As a child, Goldberg suffered from obesity, weighing nearly 240 pounds in the fourth grade. He began running on the treadmill after school and lost 50 pounds halfway through fifth grade as a result.At a young age, Goldberg had a dream of becoming a pop star; a psychiatrist noted that it seemed to be the only thing on his mind. An outlet for Goldberg was writing poetry in his diary, which eventually evolved into writing pop songs at the age of 17. According to Goldberg, the main artists he listened to were Justin Bieber, Vanilla Ice, and Limp Bizkit.


== Career ==


=== 2012–2014: Career beginnings ===
Goldberg first began rhyming under the name BDG (his initials). He began uploading his content on YouTube after a childhood friend discovered music that he had recorded and encouraged him to create a channel to gain a following. His first song was a freestyle to "Party in the USA" by Miley Cyrus. The students at his school reacted negatively towards his work, but he began building a fanbase online. In the sixth grade, Goldberg started collaborating with his friend Colin Mitchell, a local emcee known as C-Mitch. Their first project was Lethal Combination. While the reception from the public was generally negative as well, one of the duo's CDs ended up in the possession of producer Jon Glass, who saw their potential and became a mentor to them.
Goldberg later adopted the stage name Token, which came out of feeling different from other emcees  as a white Jewish kid from Salem. He started uploading his music videos through YouTube when he was 14. He released his debut mixtape, The Mindstate, in February 2014.


=== 2015–2016: “No Sucka MCs” and early success ===
In October 2015, Token released a video of himself rhyming while walking through a Marblehead neighborhood for the "No Sucka MCs" hip hop contest. The video amassed over 500,000 views in just three days. It gained the attention of several celebrities, including Fred Durst, Mark Wahlberg, and T-Pain. Soon, Token became friends with Wahlberg, who began inviting him to his house in Los Angeles. In April 2016, he appeared on the radio show Sway in the Morning, on which he performed a freestyle over the beat of Lil Wayne's "Believe Me". His performance brought co-host Tracy G to tears as a result. The video of his appearance went viral, which earned him further recognition. Token performed a free hip hop show presented by Wahlberg in May 2016, which was filmed for Wahlberg's reality TV show Wahlburgers. Wahlberg also helped Token earn a role in the film Patriots Day, of Dzhokhar Tsarnaev's college roommate (Andrew Dwinells of UMass Dartmouth). On September 23, 2016, Token released his second mixtape Eraser Shavings. The song "Exception" from the mixtape has reached millions of streams. Token also first started touring in 2016, beginning in Europe.


=== 2017–2019: Singles and Between Somewhere ===
From January 2017 to mid-2018, Token consecutively released non-album singles and videos through YouTube, including "Doozy", "Patty Cake" and "Code Red", all three of which amassed millions of streams and views on YouTube. In August 2018, Token released his song "Flamingo", the lead single from his third mixtape Between Somewhere, which was released on December 7, 2018. Between Somewhere features guest vocals from IDK and Bas and was rated 3.3 out of 5 stars in a HipHopDX review. Token also collaborated with Tech N9ne in a bonus track from the mixtape, "YouTube Rapper". In 2019, Token signed to eOne Music.


=== 2020–present: Signing with Atlantic Records and Pink Is Better ===
In 2020, Goldberg founded his own label, Never Too Different, and signed a distribution deal for his label with Atlantic Records. In August 2020, he released the single "30 People", his first song under the newly founded label. In July 2021, Goldberg announced that he had directed a music video for Lil Xan, though as of 2023 the track and video have not been released by either artist.Goldberg's debut studio album Pink Is Better was released on January 14, 2022. The release of his album was preceded by four singles, two solo tracks ("Chit Chat" and "Sip"), "High Heels", featuring Rico Nasty, and "IOD", featuring Lil Skies.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===


=== Mixtapes ===


=== Singles ===


==== As lead artist ====


== References ==Tony Lamar Brice (born 1987), better known by his stage name Tone Trump, is an American rapper.


== Biography ==
Tone Trump was born in Philadelphia and raised by a Muslim family, later changing his name to Abdul Sallam. His initial desire to be a professional basketball player ended after he was expelled from high school, so he focused his attention on his music.
In 2007, Tone Trump teamed up with fellow Philadelphia-area rappers Jay Bezel and Hedonis da Amazon to produce an antiviolence single entitled "Every Day Is Crazy." One of Tone Trump's songs was chosen for the soundtrack for Close to Death, a documentary on urban gun violence by Philadelphia-based producers, getting him on the radar of a few major record labels. He also owns his own record label, Top Notch Entertainment. He was also signed to G-Unit Philly and was also a member of The G-Unit Philly Group (with Mike Knox, Ive Vegas, Cotic); in 2009 he left the label due to a feud with fellow member Mike Knox. In January 2010, Tone Trump collaborated with Black Wall Street's artist Nu Jerzey Devil for the song "What It Look Like." Tone Trump recently signed a deal with Young Jeezy's CTE World label.
Tone Trump has close affiliations with entrepreneurs Hood Rellic, Chris Banks of the clothing label Banks and Ross Collection, as well as significant collaborations with fellow rap artist and model agent Smutty Major Movez. He is the author of many catch phrases, such as "Let's Win" and "Hustle or Starve". Tone Trump won artist of the year at the 2012 Philly Hip Hop Awards.His song "Ghetto Boy," featuring Freeway Ricky Ross, was produced by Smitti Boi. Tone Trump made a cameo appearance in the 2015 boxing drama Creed, where he had a brief altercation with the main character.
In 2016 Tone Trump released his album TONY, which was entirely produced by Smitti Boi.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===
Trump Life (2009)
TONY (2015)


=== Mixtapes ===
Blood, Sweat, & Prayers (with Lex Luger) (2018)
West Side Story (2013)
The New Fresh Prince (2012)
Worldstar Tony (2011)
Product Of Philly (2010)


== References ==


== External links ==
Official websiteMarc Joseph Predka (born April 21, 1975), better known by his stage name Tha Trademarc, is an American hip hop artist. He first came to prominence when he and his younger first cousin, WWE wrestler John Cena, collaborated on the 2005 album You Can't See Me, including Cena's entrance theme "The Time Is Now". He also appeared in the music videos of the songs, "Bad Bad Man" and "Right Now" with Cena. Prior to the album, Trademarc appeared on Cena's first WWE DVD Word Life.
In August 2007, Trademarc appeared at Total Nonstop Action Wrestling's (TNA) Hard Justice pay-per-view as the "new boyfriend" of Karen Angle, later revealed to be a ruse when Karen and Trademarc helped Karen's "estranged" husband Kurt Angle win the match. He appeared again on iMPACT! the next week. While working with TNA he also re-recorded Kurt Angle's entrance music, mixing in a rap he did over a Lunatic Fringe beat with the TNA-composed "My Quest" to form the hip hop theme "Gold Medal". In 2008, he released his first solo debut album Inferiority Complex.


== East Coast Avengers ==
In August 2008, Tha Trademarc collaborated with Massachusetts rappers Esoteric and DC The Midi Alien to create the East Coast Avengers. Their group debut album Prison Planet was released in late 2008. The group released their song "Kill Bill O'Reilly" which caused a media controversy due to lyrics that centered on violently killing Bill O'Reilly. Michelle Malkin's criticism of the song led to the group recording "Dear Michelle" in response. They have since released another single titled "Hey America!".


== Discography ==


=== With John Cena ===
You Can't See Me (May 10, 2005) RIAA: Platinum


=== Solo ===
Inferiority Complex (Apr. 4, 2008) RIAA: N/A
Black Ash Days With DC the Midi Alien (May 16, 2015)
Blood Meridian With Filthy Animals (November 22, 2019)


=== With East Coast Avengers ===
Prison Planet (Oct. 7, 2008) RIAA: N/A
Avengers Airwaves


== References ==


== External links ==
Tha Trademarc (Marc Predka) at IMDbAnthony Shawn Criss (born December 2, 1970), better known by his stage name Treach, is an American rapper and actor. He is perhaps best known as the lead rapper of the hip hop group Naughty by Nature.


== Career ==
With Naughty by Nature, Treach worked with fellow group members Vin Rock and DJ Kay Gee. Sometimes he shared verses on songs with Vin Rock, but often, especially on the group's earlier albums, Treach was the sole performer on the song. Examples of this are some of the group's most well-known singles from their self-titled second album, such as "O.P.P." and "Ghetto Bastard".


== Personal life ==
Treach is the older brother of Diesel, who is also a rapper and who is a member of the Rottin Razkals, a group closely affiliated with Naughty by Nature.
Treach had a close friendship with rapper Tupac Shakur. They collaborated on Shakur's song "5 Deadly Venomz" and Treach appeared in his music video "Temptations."


=== Marriages ===
Treach was married to Sandra Denton, better known as Pepa of the hip hop group Salt-n-Pepa, from July 1999 until 2001. The couple had one daughter, Egypt Jahnari Criss (born September 2, 1998). Denton documented the marriage in her 2008 memoir Let's Talk About Pepa, which included allegations of abuse. In April 2017, Treach responded on Instagram, saying they were all false.According to VH1, Treach has been with his common-law wife Cicely Evans for the last ten years. They have two children together. The couple starred on season 5 of Couples Therapy on VH1 in 2014. Treach and Cicely Evans married on September 8, 2019, in New Jersey.


=== Legal issues ===
Treach was arrested in Union City, New Jersey, on April 10, 2014. He allegedly passed traffic police in his Cadillac Escalade at 55 miles per hour in a 25-mile per hour zone and attempted to elude law enforcement officers after being given a signal to stop, leading them on a high-speed chase for nine blocks before stopping. He then left his vehicle and ran towards the police car; the officers drew their weapons and ordered him to return to his vehicle. Treach later complied with the officers' orders and was cited for reckless driving, speeding and driving with a suspended license. Officers also found there was a warrant for his arrest out of Essex County, New Jersey, for failing to appear at a hearing related to child support, and warrants out of Union City and Secaucus, New Jersey, for failing to appear at hearings related to motor vehicle violations. He made his first court appearance on the charge in Jersey City, New Jersey, on April 11 and spent the night in Hudson County jail in Kearny before being released after posting $15,000 bail.


== Discography ==

Studio albumsIndependent Leaders (1989)
Naughty by Nature (1991)
19 Naughty III (1993)
Poverty's Paradise (1995)
Nineteen Naughty Nine: Nature's Fury (1999)
IIcons (2002)
Anthem Inc. (2011)


== Filmography ==


=== Film ===


=== Television ===


== References ==


== External links ==
Treach at IMDbDurron Maurice Butler (born April 30, 1967), known as Turbo B, is an American rapper and beatboxer. He was once the frontman of the German electronic music group Snap!
After completing a period of service with the United States Army in Germany, Butler went on tour with the Fat Boys. He was soon discovered by the managers of Snap! and contributed to the albums World Power and The Madman's Return and their respective number-one hits, "The Power" and "Rhythm Is a Dancer".
After leaving Snap!, Butler pursued a solo career and also formed the group Centory, which had several minor hits. Butler is known to tour with other artists who were prominent in the 1990s. He has contributed to singles by Victoria Silvstedt, H-Blockx, Master Blaster, and Regi Penxten.


== Early years ==
Born in McKeesport, Pennsylvania, Butler started his music career as a drummer for a heavy metal band in his hometown. After joining the United States Army in July 1985, he completed basic training (C-4-3) at Fort Dix and was transferred to the 8th SC, Redstone Arsenal in Alabama for advanced training, where he qualified to become an ammunition specialist. With his training complete, he was sent to Friedberg, Germany to join the 60th Ordnance Company in Ray Barracks. After completing his service in the army he returned to the US but went back to Germany shortly thereafter to tour with the Fat Boys. In 1989, DJ Rico Sparx discovered Butler's rapping talent and introduced him to  Snap! producers Michael Münzing and Luca Anzilotti. The duo picked him to replace Chill Rob G's vocals in their song "The Power". He chose the stage name Turbo B, which had been his nickname since childhood.


== Success with Snap! ==
"The Power" became a major international hit, and Butler became recognizable as the frontman of the group. To promote their debut album, World Power, they toured widely.In the run-up to the 1992 release of Snap!'s second album, The Madman's Return, "Rhythm Is a Dancer" was planned to be the first single. Butler reportedly hated the song and wanted "Colour of Love" to be issued instead. In December 1991, he got his wish, but "Colour of Love" went fairly unnoticed in the UK and US charts. Münzing and Anzilotti then insisted on releasing "Rhythm Is a Dancer" as the second single, and it became the group's second major international hit. Butler left Snap! shortly after due to growing dissent with the group and its managers.In 2000, Snap! and Turbo B rejoined for a comeback and released the single "Gimme a Thrill". The song failed to chart, and their planned album One Day on Earth was subsequently never released.


== Solo career and Centory ==
After leaving Snap!, Butler pursued a solo career, releasing the album Make Way for the Maniac in 1993 on Polydor Records. It featured the singles "I'm Not Dead", "Get Wild", "What You See", and "Nice & Smooth".He went on to form the band Centory in 1994, with Gary Carolla, Delgado (Kevin Estevez), and Alex Trime (Eddie Gibson). They released the album Alpha Centory, which spawned four minor hits in the European charts. Butler toured with Centory following their success. He did not feature on their last single, a cover of Milli Vanilli's "Girl You Know It's True", which instead featured singer Trey D.
Butler did not issue any more solo material until 2005, when his single "New Day" was released under Holy Chaos Recordings. He has contributed to singles by Victoria Silvstedt, H-Blockx, Master Blaster, and Regi Penxten, among others.


== Discography ==


=== with Snap! ===
Albums

Singles


=== with Centory ===
Albums

Singles


=== Solo releases ===
Albums

Singles


=== Collaborations ===


== References ==Jamel Da'Shawn Phillips (born May 30, 1989), known professionally as ASAP Twelvyy (stylized as A$AP Twelvyy), is an American rapper from Harlem, New York City. He is a member of the hip hop group ASAP Mob, from which he adopted his moniker. In 2014, he released the song "Xscape", the second single to the ASAP Mob's debut album L.O.R.D. The album was supposed to be released in 2014, but it was officially scrapped. On August 4, 2017, ASAP Twelvyy released his debut album, titled 12.


== Early life ==
Jamel Phillips was born on May 30, 1989, in Harlem Hospital Center. He first lived at Convent Avenue and 129th street in Harlem, then Lenox Avenue and 127th street in Harlem, then moved to Castle Hill, Bronx in 2003. The name "Twelvyy" comes from his nickname "212". That was the area code in Harlem. "...I didn't want to be called "A$AP 212" because it don't flow right." says Philips. "A$AP Twelvyy is smooth and girls love Twelvy." Philips met ASAP Yams (co-founder of ASAP Mob) in 2006. He was introduced to fellow member ASAP Rocky by Yams at a house party in 2008. Philips was influenced by other New York artists such as Jay Z, Big L, Nas, Stack Bundles, 50 Cent and Big Pun.


== Career ==


=== 2011–15: Career beginnings with ASAP Mob ===
On September 19, 2011, ASAP Twelvyy was featured in ASAP Rocky's song "Trilla" with ASAP Nast. The song appeared on Rocky's debut mixtape Live. Love. ASAP (2011). That's when Twelvyy's name was first revealed to the people. Throughout 2012, Twevlyy started releasing his own material for the first time with songs such as "A.S.A.P. Bullshit", "12 Unleashed" and "Our World" featuring ASAP Nast. Twelvyy also appeared on the ASAP Mob's debut mixtape Lords Never Worry released on August 28, 2012. He appeared on the tracks "Full Metal Jacket", "Y.N.R.E.", "Jay Reed" and "Gotham City". On April 21, 2014, Twelvyy released the song "Xscape", which was the second single to the ASAP Mob's debut album, L.O.R.D. On June 5, 2014, he was featured in the third single to the album called "Hella Hoes" with ASAP Rocky, ASAP Ferg and ASAP Nast. Later that year ASAP Yams announced that the album was going to be scrapped.On August 29, 2014, ASAP Twelvyy released the song, "Glock Rivers". On November 20, 2014, the official music video for "Glock Rivers" was released. The video revealed that Twelvyy would soon be releasing his debut mixtape. On April 15, 2015, he released the song, "LORD". Sources said this song would not appear on his mixtape. On August 24, 2015, Twelvyy released his next single, "Heaven Can Wait" featuring Emilz.


=== 2016–2019: 12 ===
In 2016, Twelvyy went on tour with the Flatbush Zombies during the 3001: A Laced Odyssey Tour, along with fellow New York Rapper Remy Banks of World's Fair.
On January 1, 2016, he released another single called, "L.Y.B.B. (Resolution)". On January 29, 2016, he releases a song called "Trips" in anticipation for his tour with Flatbush Zombies. On January 31, 2016, Twelvyy released a freestyle of ASAP Rocky's "1 Train", which appeared on Rocky's debut album Long. Live. ASAP (2013).On February 18, 2016, ASAP Twelvyy released the single, "Lords Never Worry" featuring ASAP Rocky and ASAP Nast. The song is a part of the #WavyWednesdays series. On March 9, 2016, Twelvyy released another song for the series called "Again" which features ASAP Ant. On March 29, 2016, ASAP Twelvyy revealed he was releasing a mixtape called 2127301090. On Instagram, he posted a picture of the album cover that says "coming soon" in the middle. On March 30, 2016, Twelvyy released another song with Rocky and Nast called "Presidents", which is also included in the #WavyWednesdays series. On August 31, 2016, ASAP Twelvyy released Motivation featuring Da$h and AZ.On August 4, 2017, ASAP Twelvyy finally released his debut album, titled 12.


=== 2020–Present: Noon Yung ===
On February 11, Twelvyy released debut single "Gunpla" for his next mixtape "Before Noon".


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===


=== Extended plays ===


=== Mixtapes ===


=== Singles ===


==== As lead artist ====


==== As featured artist ====


=== Guest appearances ===


== References ==Lamont Jody Hawkins (born November 10, 1970), better known by his stage name U-God, is an American rapper and member of the hip hop collective Wu-Tang Clan. He has been with the group since its inception, and is known for his deep voice and rhythmic flow that can alternate between gruff and smooth.


== Early life ==
Hawkins was born in Brownsville, Brooklyn, New York City. He moved to Staten Island as a youth. He was originally a beatboxer for Cappadonna, and was friends with future members Method Man, Inspectah Deck and childhood friend of Raekwon. Sometime before the members united, U-God was mentored in rap by Cappadonna. He soon became friends with RZA and Ghostface Killah, and he began rhyming under the alias Golden Arms, based on the Kung-Fu movie Kid with the Golden Arm. Later on he changed his name to U-God (which is short for his Five-Percent Nation righteous name "Universal God Allah").


== Career ==


=== Enter the Wu-Tang (36 Chambers) / Wu-Tang Forever ===
U-God was convicted on the grounds of firearm and drug possession charges on April 17, 1992, and was paroled in January 1993. His incarceration prevented him from attending the group's debut album Enter the Wu-Tang (36 Chambers) recording sessions for the most part, his input on the seminal LP consisting of only a short bridge on the group's debut single "Protect Ya Neck" as well as the fan-favorite opening verse of "Da Mystery of Chessboxin'". Nevertheless, after his release, he quickly became known to fans for his rugged flow and bass-like voice on Wu tracks such as "Winter Warz", "Knuckleheadz", "Investigative Reports", and "Black Jesus". He was featured heavily on the group's second album Wu-Tang Forever, on which he was one of only four of the group to get a solo track – "Black Shampoo" (the others being Inspectah Deck with "The City", RZA with "Sunshower" and Ol' Dirty Bastard with "Dog Shit").


=== Golden Arms Redemption ===
U-God was the eighth member of the group to record a solo album, releasing Golden Arms Redemption in 1999 on Priority Records, which displayed a wide variety of sounds from gritty blaxploitation funk to urgent string sections, and featured guest appearances from several Wu-Tang members and affiliates. It had two singles in "Dat's Gangsta" and "Bizarre". The song "Rumble" was used as the main song for the video game Wu-Tang: Shaolin Style. Bizarre debuted #7 on the Billboard Hot Rap Singles, but soon after Priority Records was on the verge of shutting down. Still, the album managed to go Gold in sales. Based on the initial success, U-God was able to open his own label, Suppa Nigga Productions. He released his second album Mr. Xcitement in 2005.


=== Dopium and The Keynote Speaker ===
In 2009 U-God released the album Dopium and had the lead single "Wu-Tang" featuring Method Man. The album featured guest appearances by Sheek Louch, Jim Jones, Raekwon, Ghostface Killah, GZA, Cappadonna, Method Man, Killah Priest and Scotty Wotty with production by Bloody Beat Roots, Felix Cartel and Large Professor. In 2013 U-God announced a new album The Keynote Speaker with production by RZA who also served as the albums executive producer. The album was released on July 23, 2013, by RZA's Soul Temple Records with guest appearances from Styles P, Kool Keith, Method Man, RZA, GZA and Inspectah Deck.


=== Venom and autobiographical book ===
On December 13, 2016, U-God released through Babygrande Records' SoundCloud account a song "Venom" and announced that his new album, also called Venom, would be released soon. On September 25, 2017, he added a tweet in which he announced that he had finished his autobiography entitled Raw: My Journey Into The Wu-Tang and it would be released along with his new album in March 2018. On February 2, 2018, he released a free mixtape Bring Back God II through DatPiff platform. Venom was released on March 30, 2018 and debuted at #34 on the U.S. Rap Albums Chart.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===
Golden Arms Redemption  (1999)
Mr. Xcitement (2005)
Dopium (2009)
The Keynote Speaker (2013)
Venom (2018)


=== Collaboration albums ===
UGodz-Illa Presents: The Hillside Scramblers with The Hillside Scramblers (2004)


== Personal life ==
Around the time of Wu Tang Forever, his two-year-old son Dontae (now a hip-hop artist as iNTeLL) was struck by a stray bullet while on his way to a birthday party, suffering permanent damage to his kidneys and hands, an ordeal U-God documented on the Wu-Tang Clan track "A Better Tomorrow".


== Bibliography ==
U-God (2018). Raw: My Journey Into The Wu-Tang. New York: Picador. ISBN 978-1-250-19116-8. OCLC 1001859919.


== References ==


== External links ==

U-God at IMDb
NPR interview, March 2018Teyon Isiah Winfree (born March 13, 1985), better known by his stage name Vado (backronym for Violence And Drugs Only), is an American rapper from New York. He signed to DJ Khaled's We the Best Music in 2013 and was also a member of the duo U.N. with fellow New York rapper Cam'ron.


== Biography ==


=== Early life ===
Teyon Winfree was born on March 13, 1982. He was raised in Harlem and grew up on 144th and Lenox. His Mother is of Ghanaian, and his father is African American descent. Winfree first started writing at 16 and was influenced by Ma$e, Cam'ron, and Big L. At the age of 19, Vado appeared on a public access television show named "Mad Ciphas."  In 2008, he released tracks with childhood friend, Jae Millz. Winfree's original stage name was MOVADO but later was shortened to VADO. Vado is an acronym that stands for "Violence And Drugs Only."


=== Career ===
In March 2009 a mutual friend linked Vado with New York rapper and Dipset member Cam'ron who invited Vado to come record music with him and after their first session Cam made Vado the new keystone artist of his crew U.N. Vado officially released his long-awaited debut mixtape Slime Flu on October 12, 2010 under Diplomat Records/E1 Music.
Vado is featured on the DJ Khaled track "Future" with rappers Ace Hood, Wale, Meek Mill and Big Sean, produced by Boi-1da, from Khaled's fifth studio album We the Best Forever. In 2010, Vado's mentor and friend Cam'ron introduced him to Roc-A-Fella Records co-founder Dame Dash, and Cam'ron and Dame were in talks of the U.N. signing to the newly re-launched Roc-A-Fella. Vado signed with Dame's subsidiary record label of Roc-A-Fella under DD172 named BluRoc. The U.N. would also sign to BluRoc instead of Roc-A-Fella.
After signing he would release the critically acclaimed mixtape Slime Flu and the Bosses of all Bosses mixtape with Cam'ron. He would then release the album Gunz n' Butta with Cam'ron in April 2011. It would chart on the Billboard 200 at #78. On November 25, 2011 he would release the second Slime Flu mixtape. In 2012 after remaining quiet for a while Vado was granted a release from Interscope to return to the independents. On January 22, 2013 Vado released his third installment of his Slime Flu mixtape series. On January 30, 2013, Vado confirmed he signed with DJ Khaled's We the Best Music Group label. Vado has appeared on different VH1 shows, like Love & Hip Hop and Black Ink Crew. After appearing on Lil Wayne's Dedication 5 and DJ Khaled's Suffering from Success, on December 13, 2013, Vado released a new single Look Me In My Eyes featuring Rick Ross and French Montana. He also announced that he would be releasing a new mixtape titled Sinatra. Sinatra was released February 10, 2014.


== Discography ==


=== Collaborative albums ===


=== Mixtapes ===


=== Singles ===


==== As featured artist ====


=== Guest appearances ===


== References ==Justina Valentine  is an American television host, rapper and singer from Passaic County, New Jersey, best known for her singles "Candy Land" featuring rapper Fetty Wap, "All The Way" and "Unbelievable". She is also known as a cast member on the improv comedy show Wild 'N Out (2016–present).


== Early life ==
Valentine was born in Passaic County, New Jersey. She is of Italian descent. She grew up in a family of musicians and did theatre and dance as a child. Valentine always had a love for hip hop and R&B. In 2006, she started recording her own music.


== Career ==
Valentine released her first mixtape Route 80 in 2012. The singles "Bubble Gum" and "Hip-hop Joan Jett" became popular hits on YouTube. Valentine released the EP Valentine in 2013, debuting at number 38 on the iTunes R&B charts. On July 8, 2014, the singer released her second mixtape, Red Velvet. In 2016, she released her studio album, Scarlet Letter. In 2017, Valentine released a third mixtape, Feminem, described as a homage to the rapper Eminem. She released the album Favorite Vibe in 2019, which debuted in the top 30 hip hop charts and gained over a million streams in its first two weeks. Favorite Vibe was shortly followed by the album Infrared in 2020, which debuted in the top 5 on the iTunes charts. Infrared is described as "an infusion of classic hip hop and R&B, with a pop sensibility."In 2016, Valentine was added to the cast of season 8 of Wild 'N Out on MTV (later VH1) and has been a member of the cast for every successive season since. As of season 17, she is the longest running female cast member to appear on the show.Valentine competed on season 1 of the reality series special for MTV's The Challenge titled Champs vs. Stars, which premiered on November 21, 2017. Valentine made it to the finale, finishing as a runner-up alongside fellow "Stars" UFC fighter Michelle Waterson and The Bachelorette Season 10 winner Josh Murray. In 2019, Valentine hosted the two-part reunion of The Challenge: War of the Worlds 2.In November 2018, Valentine was selected to co-host a relaunched version of the MTV dating game show Singled Out alongside rapper and fellow Wild 'N Out cast member Conceited that aired exclusively on the network's YouTube channel.
In August 2019, Valentine and fellow Wild 'N Out cast member Chico Bean stated that Sebastian Maniscalco was Valentine's "second freaking cousin".In 2021, Valentine began appearing weekly alongside Nick Cannon on his syndicated daytime talk show, Nick Cannon, during "The Rap Up" and other segments.In February 2022, she became the third host of the iHeartRadio and MTV podcast series MTV's Women of Wild 'N Out, alongside co-hosts B. Simone and Pretty Vee.
Valentine has also gained prominence as a social media personality on TikTok where she actively posts content. As of September 2022, her account (@justinavalentine) has amassed over 10 million followers and over 200 million likes.


== Musical style and influences ==
Valentine's eclectic music style infuses hip hop with elements of other genres. She has had charting singles and major radio airplay.


== Discography ==
Albums

Scarlet Letter (2016)
Favorite Vibe (2019)
Infrared (2020) EPs

Valentine (2013) Mixtapes

Route 80 (2012)
Red Velvet (2014)
Feminem (2017)


== Filmography ==


== Tours ==
Vans Warped Tour (2012)
Relief Tour (2013)
Vans Warped Tour (2014)
Mike Stud Tour (2014)
Liquid Sunshine Experience Tour (2015)
Hate Us Cause They Ain't Us Tour (2016)
As Seen on the Internet Tour (2016)
Scarlet Letter Tour (2016)
Weirdo Tour (2017)
Favorite Vibe Tour (2019)
Wild ‘N Out Live (Cast Member) (Multiple Tours; 2018-2022)


== References ==


== External links ==

Official websiteOllie Bruce Williams (born February 22, 1982), better known by his stage name, Ali Vegas, is an American rapper from Queens, New York and founder of the record labels Council Recordings and Rich Soil Entertainment. After two failed deals with major record labels, Vegas frequently performed on underground mixtapes and established his own record labels. He is also the younger cousin of two-time NBA champion Lamar Odom.


== Biography ==
He entered the New York City hip-hop scene around the late 1990s. Onyx and Panama P.I. mentored him when he was young. Vegas's tracks, one of which featured Capone, appeared on mixtapes. He signed to Columbia Records in the early 2000s, and his first single "Theme of N.Y." was released in December 2000. Trackmasters lost their distribution deal with Columbia Records, so he signed to Tommy Mottola's new label Casablanca Records, which never achieved mainstream success. After failing to release a full-length LP on any of this first three major labels, Vegas founded his independent label Council Recordings. At a benefit concert hosted by New York hip-hop radio station Hot 97, rapper Fabolous verbally attacked Vegas on stage.Vegas frequently participated in rap mixtapes, with noted street releases such as "The AV Theme", produced by Kanye West. He composed a song for DJ Boom's Boomtown in 2003. In 2005, he and basketball player Lamar Odom founded Rich Soil Entertainment, based on Vegas's rap lyric “I’m from the land of rich soil, expect the branches to follow.” Rich Soil intended to release Ali Vegas's official solo debut album.In April 2010, Ali Vegas released his latest mixtape Veganomics. In an interview with hip hop website Icon Hip Hop, he discussed his latest business ventures outside of music.According to his official Facebook fan page, in May 2011, Ali Vegas returned to the music scene this time teaming up with Sydney based production team Sound Kamp, which is made up of The Iron Ghost & P.R to release a six-track album titled Bridging the Gap.


== Discography ==
AlbumsGeneration Gap (Unreleased) (1999)
Generation Gap 2: The Prequel (2008)
Veganomics (Alpha Beta Paper, 2010)
AutoVegography (2010)
Bridging the Gap (2011)MixtapesWhatevers Whatever (1999)
Heir to the Throne (1999)
The Rebirth of the Price Hosted By DJ Big Mike (2002)
Million Dollar Baby  (2004)
 The Best of Ali Vegas Vol. 1 (2005)
Black Card Council (2006)
The Best of Ali Vegas Vol. 2 (2006)
I Got My Glow Back Hosted By Superstar Jay (2007)
America's Prince (2008)
Leader of the New School Hosted By Statik Selektah (2008)
Transition to Power  Hosted By Superstar Jay (2009)


== References ==


== External links ==
Ali Vegas on TwitterAnderson Hernandez (born September 2, 1989), professionally known as Vinylz, is an American record producer from Washington Heights, New York City. He is known for his work with Jay-Z, Travis Scott, Rick Ross, Drake, J. Cole, Nicki Minaj, Jeremih and Tinashe.
Vinylz secured a publishing deal with Sony ATV through fellow record producer and mentor, Boi-1da, with whom he has also worked closely since.


== Early life and career ==
Anderson Hernandez was born to immigrated parents from the Dominican Republic on September 2, 1989, in Washington Heights, a neighborhood located in the New York City borough of Manhattan, living across the street from adult contemporary musician Alicia Keys. Hernandez started producing at age 14. He received his stage name, Vinylz, courtesy of a friend who noticed both of his interests for clever sampling and his father's collection of vinyl records. Vinylz began taking music production seriously and it remained his favorite hobby ever since, but he went against his parents' wishes. He got an early professional start working with Swizz Beatz and decided to drop out of college after the first semester of his first year.Setting up shop in Quad Studios, the well-known recording studio located in New York City's Time Square, Vinylz flourished through his work with up-and-coming or breakout artists like Drag-On and Cassidy. After reaching out to Canadian rapper Drake's in-house producer, Boi-1da, via Myspace to retrieve the instrumental for "Best I Ever Had", Vinylz ended up forming a relationship which would remain long after the request. Impressed by his work, Boi-1da became a mentor to the up-and-comer; the two continued on to collaborate from that point on.In 2013, Jay Z's "F***WithMeYouKnowIGotIt" featuring Rick Ross and DJ Khaled's "No New Friends" featuring Drake, Rick Ross and Lil Wayne, both of which produced by Vinylz and Boi-1da, were respectively placed on the Top 40 of the Billboard Hot 100 chart; the latter was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). A variety of hits, alongside Boi-1da, helped Vinylz reach a publishing deal with Sony ATV.Throughout 2015, he produced a high number of tracks for such artists, including Jeremih's "Planez", Big Sean's "Blessings", Meek Mill's "RICO", Lil Durk's "Like Me" and Chris Brown's "Back to Sleep".


== Production discography ==
List of songs as producer or co-producer, with performing artists and other credited producers, showing year released and album name.


== References ==


== External links ==
Vinylz at AllMusicWillie Junior Maxwell II (born June 7, 1991), better known by his stage name Fetty Wap, is an American rapper and singer. He quickly rose to mainstream prominence in late 2014, after his song "Trap Queen" was re-released as his debut single for 300 Entertainment, an imprint of Atlantic Records. The single peaked at number two on the Billboard Hot 100, and was followed up with the singles "679" (featuring Remy Boyz) and "My Way" (remixed featuring Drake), all of which saw similar chart success throughout the summer of 2015. The consecutive trio of hits promptly preceded the release of Fetty Wap's eponymous debut studio album (2015), which peaked atop the Billboard 200 chart. During this time, he became distinctive for his melodic blending of singing and rapping, lighthearted lyricism, "bouncy" production, and exclamation of various catchphrases such as "1738!".In 2016, he saw moderate success with his singles "Jimmy Choo" and "Wake Up". The same year, he was featured on Fifth Harmony's single "All In My Head (Flex)", and would release the single "Keke" (with 6ix9ine and A Boogie wit da Hoodie) two years later, which would mark his final appearance on the Billboard Hot 100. In 2022, he received a six year prison sentence for trafficking illegal substances. Fetty Wap has received two Grammy Award nominations throughout his career, and won the 2016 awards for "Best New Artist" and "Top New Artist" for the iHeartRadio Music Awards and Billboard Music Awards, respectively.


== Early life ==
Maxwell was born and raised in Paterson, New Jersey. Born with glaucoma in both eyes, Maxwell revealed in a 2015 interview that doctors were unable to save his left eye and instead fitted him with an ocular prosthesis. He attended Eastside High School before dropping out in order to pursue his music career.


== Career ==


=== 2013–2015: Beginnings and debut album ===
Fetty Wap developed an interest in making music in 2013. Initially starting off as a rapper, he later decided to start singing as well because he "wanted to do something different". He was nicknamed "Fetty," and "Wap" was added to the end of the name to perform in tribute to Gucci Mane's alias, Guwop.Fetty Wap's commercial debut single, titled "Trap Queen", was released in early 2014. This song appeared in his 2014 mixtape Up Next released in July 2014. He recorded the song in February 2014. However, it did not gain major recognition until mid-November 2014, and since then it has become a platinum record and has over 130 million plays on SoundCloud. In November 2014, Fetty Wap represented by Attorney Navarro W. Gray secured a recording contract with 300 Entertainment, the imprint was founded by Lyor Cohen, Kevin Liles, Roger Gold and Todd Moscowitz, with distribution through Atlantic Records. The song "Trap Queen" is about a woman dealing and cooking crack cocaine. His second mixtape, Fetty Wap: The Mixtape was originally set for release in February 2015, but was delayed because he continued to create new songs. In June 2015, Fetty Wap was included in XXL's 2015 Freshman Class.On June 29, 2015, Fetty Wap released his second single "679", originally from his Up Next mixtape. The song's accompanying music video premiered on YouTube in May, before being commercially released. "679" had an original version with Monty only and an added verse by Fetty Wap. The Remy Boyz version was removed from the album. His next single, "My Way", became his second top 10 entry on the Billboard Hot 100. Later, Drake remixed "My Way" and created the version that was then played on radio. Afterwards, "679" reached the Hot 100 top 10 peaking at number four.During the week of July 26 to August 1, 2015, the rapper matched Billboard marks by hip-hop prominent artists Eminem and Lil Wayne. He became the first male rapper with three songs occupying the top 20 spots on the Billboard Hot 100 chart since Eminem did so in 2013. He also became the first male rapper in four years to have concurrent singles reach the top 10 of the same chart since Lil Wayne did so in 2011. With his fourth single "Again", Fetty Wap became the first act in the Hot Rap Songs chart's 26-year history to chart his first four entries in the top 10 simultaneously.Fetty Wap's debut studio album Fetty Wap was released on September 25, 2015. The album debuted at number one on the US Billboard 200, with 129,000 equivalent album units (75,484 in pure album sales). Fetty Wap subsequently released two mixtapes for streaming only: Coke Zoo in collaboration with French Montana and ZOO 16: The Mixtape with Zoo Gang. Fetty Wap received two nominations at the 58th Grammy Awards.


=== 2016–2020: EPs, mixtapes and other releases ===
On February 5, 2016, Fetty Wap released a new single titled "Jimmy Choo". On April 26, 2016, it was announced that Fetty Wap would be getting his own mobile racing game available on phone, tablet, and Apple TV starting on May 3. The game is offshoot of mobile game Nitro Nation Stories. A street racing game, it has multi-player, car customization, and different storylines to choose. It has partnered with automotive brands like BMW, Nissan, and Cadillac. The Fetty Wap version will include Fetty Wap and Monty into the storyline.Fetty Wap was featured on the Fifth Harmony single "All in My Head (Flex)". He released the single "Wake Up" in April 2016. The official music video for the song was filmed at his alma mater, Eastside High School. His single "Make You Feel Good" was released in August 2016.On November 21, 2016, he released a 19 track mixtape titled Zoovier.His song "Like a Star" features Nicki Minaj and was released in December 2016.On January 4, 2017, he released the song "Way You Are" featuring Monty, and the song "Flip Phone" on February 10, 2017. He walked in Philipp Plein's runway show during New York Fashion Week in February 2017.He released the single "Aye" on May 12, 2017. He released the mixtape Lucky No. 7 on June 7, 2017. On August 18, 2017, he released the single "There She Go" featuring Monty. In October 2017, Fetty Wap featured in Cheat Codes' single "Feels Great" with CVBZ.On January 19, 2018, Fetty Wap released the EP For My Fans III: The Final Chapter. He released the mixtape Bruce Wayne in June 2018.On June 7, 2019, Fetty Wap's birthday, he released the single "Birthday". On September 27, he released the song "Brand New". On February 14, 2020, he released the mixtape Trap & B.


=== 2021–present: The Butterfly Effect ===
On September 28, 2021, Fetty Wap previewed the song "Out The Hood" in an Instagram video with the caption "10/22 T.B.E", giving speculation of a single or mixtape release. Later on October 13, 2021, Fetty Wap posted the official cover art for the album "The Butterfly Effect" announcing it as his second studio album, releasing six years since his debut, however on the intro, he sings "it's been seven years". The Butterfly Effect was released October 22, 2021, through 300 Entertainment & RGF Productions, marking the return of Fetty Wap after several mixtape releases & legal issues. The title derives from his late daughter, Lauren, where he drew inspiration for the album name & some songs. In November 2022, Fetty released a single titled "Sweet Yamz", a recreation of the song "Yamz" by Masego & Devin Morrison. The song went viral on the video platform TikTok and the song received positive reception, with singer Charlie Wilson releasing an unofficial remix through the app, and rapper Snoop Dogg calling it the "song of the year".


=== Influences ===
Fetty Wap has referred to his music as "ignorant R&B". He combines singing and rapping.Fetty Wap usually wears the flag of Haiti in honor of his daughter's late grandmother and draws influences from Haitian culture. In an interview with CivilTV, he said that he "fell in love with the culture; people don't know what Haiti means to me." On several occasions, Fetty Wap has also cited Atlanta-based rapper Gucci Mane as a major influence in his music.


== Personal life ==
Fetty Wap is the father of six children with five women.
Aydin (born May 2011) with Ariel Reese
Zaviera (born March 2015) with Lezhae Zeona
Khari (born March 2016) with Masika Kalysha
Amani (born April 2016) with Elaynna Parker
Lauren (2017–2021) with Turquoise Miami
Zy (born 2018) with Lezhae ZeonaIn early 2018, model Alexis Skyy named Fetty Wap as the father of her daughter Alaiya. In 2019, Fetty Wap publicly stated that he is not Alaiya's biological father, but is still a father figure to her. In December 2020, Brandon Medford was revealed to be Alaiya's biological father. Their sex tape was leaked in January 2017.Fetty Wap appeared on the third season on VH1's Love & Hip Hop: Hollywood, which documented his strained relationship with Masika. He also appeared on the ninth season of Love & Hip Hop: New York which documented his strained relationship with Alexis Skyy.In September 2019, Fetty Wap privately married model Leandra K. Gonzalez. A year later, Fetty Wap officially divorced from Gonzalez.In July 2021, Fetty Wap's daughter, Lauren, died at the age of four. TMZ reported that her death certificate stated she had died of complications of a congenital heart arrhythmia, although her mother Turquoise Miami said on Instagram in August 2021 that Lauren's cause of death had not yet been fully determined.


== Legal issues ==
Over the years, Fetty Wap has been on the receiving end of multiple lawsuits including copyright infringement, defamation, property damage and assault.At 1:20 AM on November 2, 2017, he was arrested after being pulled over on a Brooklyn highway. He was subsequently charged with drunk driving, reckless endangerment, aggravated unlicensed operation of a motor vehicle, illegally changing lanes, and drag racing.On October 29, 2021, federal prosecutors unsealed an indictment against Fetty Wap, charging him with one count of conspiracy to distribute and possess controlled substances. He was arrested at Citi Field and pleaded not guilty to federal drug charges in a New York court. Fetty Wap was released on a $500,000 bond on November 5, 2021. He was put back in jail again on August 8, 2022, after violating the terms of his pretrial release. On August 22, 2022, he pleaded guilty to his drug charges, and, on May 24, 2023, Fetty Wap was sentenced to six years in prison in New York.


== Awards and nominations ==


== Discography ==

Fetty Wap (2015)
The Butterfly Effect (2021)


== References ==


== External links ==

Official websiteOhmega Watts, real name Milton Campbell, is an American hip hop producer and vocalist from Brooklyn, New York. He releases music under the name Ohmega Watts and as a part of the Lightheaded crew.


== Biography ==
Campbell was born and raised in Brooklyn, New York, by West Indian Parents from Jamaica. He lived in Brooklyn for eight years before moving to Laurelton, Queens, New York.
He grew up listening to many types of music including reggae, calypso, soca, death metal, 80's pop and hip-hop, but only started to take a serious interest in music when he was around 11 years old. He gravitated towards hip-hop, listening to "Golden Age" artists including Run–D.M.C., LL Cool J, Big Daddy Kane, Dana Dane, BDP, Eric B. and Rakim, Pete Rock and CL Smooth and Gang Starr, but the artists who influenced him the most sonically / production wise were artists in the Native Tongues Posse, such as A Tribe Called Quest, Jungle Brothers, De La Soul, and Black Sheep.
Ohmega Watts' first release was “A Request”, a soulful and DJ-friendly solo 12" featuring his group Lightheaded and, former hip hop trio, The Procussions. “A Request” received praise from respected DJs, including  Mr. Scruff, Gilles Peterson, Greyboy, and the Los Angeles-based Heavyweight Record Pool. Ohmega Watts' sound was compared to playfulness of Digital Underground and big drums and chopped samples the likes of Pete Rock.
A record deal with Ubiquity Records was signed shortly after this first release. Ohmega Watts' first solo album, "The Find", was released on Ubiquity in 2005.
Producing since 1997 and MCing since 1993 the Ohmega Watts resume includes tracks produced for Mars Ill on Ill Boogie, for Listener on Mush, plus he’s recorded as Lightheaded for Day By Day Ent, and as Return To Sender on the Piece of The Action compilation. Hailing from Flatbush, Brooklyn, brought up by Jamaican parents Campbell moved to Florida for college and then settled in Portland, Oregon. He is now part of a bustling Northwest independent scene that includes the Lifesavas, Boom Bap, Soul Plasma, DJ and MC, Libretto, Lightheaded and The Blacknotes.
He has produced for Beautiful Eulogy and also produced the entire Half Dead EP by Cataphant.


== Discography ==


=== LPs ===
The Find (2005, Ubiquity Records)
Watts Happening (2007, Ubiquity Records)
Pieces of a Dream (Sept 2013, Mellow Orange)


== References ==


== External links ==
Myspace
Purevolume
Ubiquity Records Artist PageChristian Walcott Webster (born October 13, 1988), better known by his stage name Chris Webby, is an American rapper from Norwalk, Connecticut. Chris Webby has released many mixtapes such as the DJ Drama-hosted Bars On Me (2012) and his EP There Goes the Neighborhood (2011), which peaked at number 101 on the Billboard 200. He has worked with various artists such as Freeway, Mac Miller, Joell Ortiz, Big K.R.I.T., Method Man, Apathy, Prodigy, Bun B, Tech N9ne, Jarren Benton, and Kid Ink. In 2013 he and his label, Homegrown Music, signed a deal with E1 Music. He then released Homegrown, another EP, in November 2012. Webster released his debut studio album Chemically Imbalanced on October 27, 2014.


== Early life ==
Webby's mother was a middle school teacher at Nathan Hale Middle School, his father was a guitarist and he was their only child. He started listening to rap at a young age admiring Eminem, he then started writing his own raps in 2000 at age 11. He attended Greens Farms Academy, a private school in Westport, Connecticut.


== Musical career ==


=== 2007–2011: Mixtapes ===
After graduating from Green Farms Academy in 2007, Chris Webby went to Hofstra University in Long Island, New York on scholarship. During this time his rap name was Vindictive, and was a known freestyler through the frat houses, himself being a member of Sigma Alpha Epsilon fraternity (ΣΑΕ). He was arrested on March 27, 2009, during his sophomore year, in connection with a failed robbery attempt of a drug dealer on Hofstra University campus. He would then spend a week in jail and be banned from the school. Following getting kicked out he looked at rapping as a career, and focused on releasing music.On April 30, 2009, Chris Webby released his debut mixtape The White Noise LP. The mixtape featured his first hit single "La La La," first released on April 17, 2009, on YouTube, based on "Around the World" by Beat Ink and samples ATC's "Around The World". He performed at local Connecticut venues, including Toad's Place and the Heirloom Arts Theatre. Then on September 19, 2009, he released his second mixtape Teenage Mutant Ninja Rapper. The two mixtapes included tracks he had recorded since 2008.On May 10, 2010, he released his third mixtape Optimus Rhyme, intended to be a prelude to his fourth mixtape The Underclassmen. The project was billed as a "mini-mixtape" and was primarily a compilation of his unreleased tracks. He teamed up with DJBooth to release his fourth mixtape The Underclassmen on July 14, 2010, which featured a guest appearance by Mac Miller and others. The mixtape contains disses towards fellow rapper Sammy Adams.On December 21, 2010, Webby released his fifth mixtape Best in the Burbs. The mixtape featured collaborations with Statik Selektah, Ski Beatz, and Big K.R.I.T. and has been downloaded over 200,000 times on DatPiff. It had even shut down DatPiff's servers due to the high number of downloads upon its release, the first mixtape to do so.


=== 2011–2012: Webster's Laboratory and There Goes the Neighborhood ===
On June 3, 2011, Webby released his sixth mixtape Webster's Laboratory. The mixtape was hosted by DJ Ill Will and DJ Rockstar, which featured guest appearances from rappers Freeway, Gorilla Zoe, Kinetics (of Kinetics & One Love) and Apathy. This mixtape also resulted in DatPiff's server crashing. The mixtape was met with positive reviews, receiving a three out of five or "L" from XXL. Adam Fleischer of XXL said, "Webster's Laboratory ends up being further proof that not only can Chris Webby rap, but his skills are improving with each release. Having said that, his content gets somewhat tired, and Webster's Laboratory is indicative of an artist still trying to find himself and his own sound."On December 1, 2011, Webby released his first retail project an EP titled There Goes the Neighborhood. The EP would be released by his record label Homegrown Music, and feature a guest appearance by Slaine. Upon its release the EP shot to the top of the iTunes hip/hop sales chart. The EP would end up debuting at number 101 on the Billboard 200, number 13 on the Billboard Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums chart and topping the Heatseekers Albums chart. On February 10, 2012, he began a 40-date North American tour in support of the EP.


=== 2012–2013: Bars On Me, signing to eOne Music and Homegrown ===

On September 30, 2012, Webby released his seventh mixtape, Bars On Me hosted by famed mixtape DJ, DJ Drama. The mixtape included guest appearances from Bun B, D. Lector, Emilio Rojas, Jon Connor, Kid Ink, Method Man, Nikkiya and Prodigy, with notable production credits coming from Cardo, Sap, Don Cannon, Omen, Ski Beatz, and WillPower among others. Its release was covered by MTV, who interviewed him as he described the title saying, "There's definitely a few meanings that you could use with it, but the main one being lyrical bars. That's what I'm known for, that's what I continue to do, and I think a lot of artists kinda need to step their bars up a little bit." It featured all original material and received over 100,000 downloads on DatPiff in less than a week.During 2013, Webby hinted at signing with a record label, and that he was in talks with a few. However he said, "I wouldn't want to sign under another rapper just because I want to be THE rapper. With me signing, it's not going to be me changing and selling out. It is going to be me getting an opportunity to really formulate my own thing. Homegrown Music will be my G-Unit, Shady Records, GOOD Music." After remaining independent for his entire career, in mid-2013 he signed a record deal with independent powerhouse eOne Music. Following that he revealed that he was working on an EP and his debut studio album, which he said will "highlight his transformation from a rapper to an artist." On August 28, 2013, Webby released the first single, "Down Right" from his first project after signing with eOne Music. The project was announced to be an EP titled, Homegrown, released on November 12, 2013.


=== 2013–2016: The Checkup – Chemically Imbalanced – Webster's Laboratory 2 ===
Also in August 2013, Webby indicated working with Scott Storch and SupaDupes on his debut album. At the red carpet for the 2013 BET Hip Hop Awards Chris Webby stated his debut album would be released in February 2014. On October 24, 2013, Webby revealed that the EP's release had been pushed back to November 12, 2013, due to sample clearance issues. Following its release, Homegrown would then peak at number 75 on the Billboard 200. In a November 2013 interview with HipHopDX, Webby also confirmed Harry Fraud as a producer on his debut album. He later revealed the album would be titled Chemically Imbalanced.On June 3, 2014, Chris Webby announced his 8th mixtape, titled The Checkup, to be released on June 17, 2014. Also on June 3, Webby released the first single off The Checkup, named Good Day, featuring fellow Connecticut and Homegrown Music Group rapper, Jitta On The Track. Following the release, on June 10, Webby released Chilly, another song featuring Fat Trel to be on The Checkup. The mixtape was released with ten songs on June 17.
On August 19, 2014, Webby digitally released the first single off Chemically Imbalanced, titled "F*ck Off."
On September 26, 2014, Webby announced the release date and artwork for Chemically Imbalanced. It was released on October 27, 2014.
On July 17, 2015, Webby released his 12th project, "Jamo Neat", a collab EP with producer Sap. The project came together over the course of eight days in the studio together. The EP was supported by the singles "Whatchu Need" featuring Sap & Stacey Michelle, and "Vibe 2 It" featuring Sap.
On December 30, 2015,  Webby announced on his personal Twitter account that he had begun working on his 13th project and 9th mixtape called Webster's Laboratory 2 (a sequel to the original from 2011) and began releasing new material in promotion of the project. On May 11, 2016, he announced its release date, and Webster's Laboratory 2 was released on June 1, 2016.


== Personal life ==
He told AllHipHop in 2013, that he uses Adderall in the studio, which he is prescribed. He explained that he was diagnosed with ADHD at a young age and has been on attention medication throughout his life. He says to this day that he has very bad attention deficit disorder.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===


=== Mixtapes ===


=== Extended plays ===


=== Singles ===


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Chris Webby on TwitterTroy Ryan (born October 25, 1986), better known by his stage name DJ Webstar (or simply Webstar) is an American DJ and record producer. In 2006, his song "Chicken Noodle Soup", became popular and became an Internet meme, with fans uploading amateur videos dancing to the track. The song's popularity led to him being signed by the now defunct Universal Records.


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===


=== Singles ===


=== Guest appearances ===


== References ==


== External links ==
Baller Status News about DJ Webstar and Chicken Noodle Soup
BET News on DJ Webstar
Webstar
Webstar "Chicken Noodle Soup" Music Video on Gotuit MusicKhadimou Rassoul Cheikh Fall (born September 10, 1998), known professionally as Sheck Wes, is an  American rapper and singer. He is best known for his 2017 song "Mo Bamba", which became popular in 2018.In February 2018, Wes signed signed a joint record deal with Travis Scott's Cactus Jack and Kanye West's GOOD Music, under the aegis of Interscope Records. Wes has been regarded as a one-hit wonder.


== Early life ==
Khadimou Rassoul Cheikh Fall was born on September 10, 1998, in the Harlem neighborhood of New York City to parents of Senegalese descent. Fall was raised in a Muslim household. At age five, he and his mother, Ella Kingsland, moved to Milwaukee, Wisconsin, where he lived for nine years. At 14, he moved back to New York. Fall began making music at age 11, to relieve stress due to his troubled childhood as he was raised in a hostile environment. While in high school, basketball became a major extracurricular pursuit, but he attracted interest from a fashion talent scout, leading him to skip a playoff game to participate in the Madison Square Garden unveiling of the Yeezy Season 3 collection.


== Music career ==


=== 2018–2019: Mudboy ===
On February 2, 2018, Wes signed to Kanye West's GOOD Music and Travis Scott's Cactus Jack Records label alongside Interscope. Wes made a guest appearance on Scott's third studio album Astroworld on the song "No Bystanders" alongside American rapper Juice Wrld. On October 2, Wes announced his debut studio album titled Mudboy which was released just three days after. On March 19, Wes released a new single under the Cactus Jack label called YKTS.


=== 2019–2021: Hell 2 Paradise ===
Following the release of Mudboy, Wes announced that his second studio album was in the works.In January 2019, Wes was part of the opening act for Eminem's concert in Hawaii alongside fellow American rapper Logic. On July 18, Wes released the singles "Sadio Mane", and "Losing My Mind". The following day on July 19, he appeared on Chase B and Young Thug's song "Mayday". On October 31, he released the song "YKTS" which was accompanied by a music video. On December 27, Wes made a guest appearance on the Cactus Jack compilation album JackBoys on the song "Gang Gang" also featuring Don Toliver, Travis Scott, and Luxury Tax 50.On November 6, 2020, Wes released the single "Rich One Day" and released the single "#BeenBallin" on November 19, 2020.
Wes released "GFU" with record label YSL Records and American rapper Yak Gotti, featuring American rapper Yung Kayo, which serves as the second single from the label's compilation album, Slime Language 2, on January 29, 2021.


== Basketball career ==
On November 18, 2020, Wes wrote on Instagram that he had entered the 2020 NBA draft, although he went undrafted. On November 19, 2020, he joined Paris Basketball, a team that competes in LNB Pro A. On May 10, 2021, Wes signed with Paris Basketball. On May 28, he made his debut, playing 4 minutes. He played two more games with Paris Basketball, averaging 1.3 points per game during his time there.


=== Career statistics ===


== Legal issues ==
On January 31, 2019, Ridge Productions claimed Wes had refused to pay for the video for his forthcoming single "Mudboy". Ridge Productions posted the original edit of the video, with substituted audio mocking Wes and his crew for reneging on their agreement.In February 2019, Wes was caught on video stalking his former partner, singer Justine Skye. After Skye came out publicly about Wes abusing her, former classmates of Wes' high school stated that he did abuse other women before at school. In April 2019, he dated social media personality India Love. In June 2019, Love posted and deleted a picture of a black eye that hinted Wes abused her after their breakup. Later on in the year, they rekindled their relationship. In June 2020, they had a public dispute. Love even hinted that Wes abused her after she posted a picture with a black eye with the caption "This is why we are over Sheck, stop telling people I cheated on you". She later took the post down. Wes was removed from an advertising campaign for Major League Soccer in response to the allegations. Skye was subsequently reported to have requested a restraining order against Wes. Wes has denied the allegations and no charges were ever brought forward. Skye's one-time boyfriend, rapper GoldLink, has repeatedly insulted and criticized Wes publicly over the abuse allegations.On May 21, 2020, Wes was arrested on drug and gun charges in New York. He was later released.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===


=== Collaborative albums ===


=== Singles ===


==== As lead artist ====


==== As featured artist ====


=== Other charted songs ===


== References ==


== External links ==
Sheck Wes discography at MusicBrainzAlvin Lamar Worthy (born July 27, 1982), known professionally as Westside Gunn, is an American rapper. He is a co-founder of independent hip-hop label Griselda Records. He is the brother of rapper Conway the Machine and cousin of rapper Benny the Butcher, both of whom he frequently collaborates with. Westside Gunn has released four studio albums in addition to an extensive catalog of mixtapes. Gunn was affiliated with Shady Records from 2017 to 2020, but has since returned to independent status.


== Career ==
Westside Gunn released his first mixtape in 2005, however his career was derailed by run-ins with the law.  Gunn did not release any music in the years 2006-2011.In 2012, Westside Gunn co-founded the Griselda Records label with his paternal half-brother Conway the Machine and Mach-Hommy. Gunn was inspired to revitalize his career by the shooting of his brother Conway that same year, which left him with permanent disabilities, as well as by the 2006 murder of his cousin Machine Gun Black. Gunn's first project for Griselda was the mixtape Hitler Wears Hermes. While the name attracted controversy for its reference to Adolf Hitler, Gunn explained that the name is a play on The Devil Wears Prada.Over the next few years, Gunn released a steady stream of mixtapes and EPs, including multiple sequels to Hitler Wears Hermes, on the Griselda label. Gunn's official studio album debut was Flygod, released on March 11, 2016.
On March 3, 2017, Griselda Records signed a deal with Eminem's Shady Records, making Westside Gunn and Conway the first rappers from Buffalo to sign with a major label. After signing with Shady, Gunn played at Coachella, Firefly and Governors Ball. On October 2, 2020, Westside Gunn released his Shady Records debut, Who Made the Sunshine, his only solo project with Shady Records.
Shortly after signing with Shady Records, Westside released Flygod Is Good... All the Time, as a collaborative EP with producer Mr. Green.  Ambrosia For Heads named 2018's Supreme Blientele one of the best albums of 2018. He also signed with Roc Nation alongside label mate Benny the Butcher on August 6, 2019, under a management deal.On April 17, 2020, he released his third studio album, Pray for Paris. The album has features from artists such as Tyler, the Creator, Wale, Joey Badass and Freddie Gibbs. On July 3, 2020, Westside Gunn released his tenth mixtape Flygod Is an Awesome God II, the sequel to his July 2019 mixtape Flygod Is an Awesome God. The album features guest appearances by frequent collaborators Benny The Butcher, Keisha Plum, Boldy James, and Daringer.On November 14, 2020, in an interview with Joe Budden, Gunn announced he had fulfilled his contractual obligations to Shady Records and had become an independent artist.In 2021, he released two songs titled "TV Boy" and "Julia Lang". The track "Julia Lang" was titled after fashion entrepreneur Julia Lang.


== Personal life ==
Gunn has stated within various interviews that he's a "devout wrestling fan" and often references this within his song lyrics and song titles. He often can be seen in the front-row seats of the audience of Impact Wrestling, Major League Wrestling, WWE and All Elite Wrestling events. He maintains friendships with wrestlers Parker Boudreaux, Lio Rush, Finn Bálor, Bianca Belair, Montez Ford, Montel Vontavious Porter, Sonjay Dutt, Daniel Garcia, and Myron Reed. When asked who were his top 5 wrestlers on fellow rapper Smoke DZA's "Personal Podcast", he stated "It always changes but Hulk Hogan, The Rock, Bret Hart, The Undertaker and Chris Benoit". On the September 7, 2022 edition of AEW Dynamite, Gunn escorted wrestler, close friend and fellow Buffalo native Daniel Garcia to the ring to face Wheeler Yuta in an ROH Pure Championship match, which Garcia won.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===


=== With Griselda ===
Don't Get Scared Now (2016)
WWCD (2019)


=== EPs ===
There's God and There's Flygod, Praise Both (2016)
Riots on Fashion Avenue (with Mil Beats) (2017)
WestSide Doom (with MF Doom) (2017)
Flygod Is Good... All the Time (with Mr. Green) (2018)


=== Mixtapes ===


=== Collaborative mixtapes ===
Hall & Nash (with Conway the Machine) (2015)
Griselda Ghost (with Conway the Machine and Big Ghost LTD) (2015)
Roses are Red... So Is Blood (with The Purist) (2016)
Hitler on Steroids (with DJ Green Lantern) (2017)


=== Charted songs ===


=== Music videos ===


== References ==Tierra Helena Whack (born August 11, 1995) is an American rapper and singer. She originally performed as "Dizzle Dizz" as a teenager, but later on reverted to her birth name in 2017. Her debut studio album, Whack World, was released in May 2018 and received widespread critical acclaim. Her song "Mumbo Jumbo" was nominated at the 61st Annual Grammy Awards for Best Music Video. Whack has since collaborated with Beyoncé, Alicia Keys, Tyler, the Creator and Melanie Martinez.


== Early life and education ==
Whack was born in 1995 and raised by her mother in North Philadelphia. She has two younger siblings. In a 2018 interview with The Fader, Whack mentioned that she and her father are estranged. Whack was an introverted child who wrote to help herself deal with her insecurities. As a child, Whack loved the author Dr. Seuss so much that she would rhyme together each of her sentences for her homework assignments.Whack pinpointed the exact moment when her love for rhyming began. She was to rhyme for a homework assignment for class, and after receiving positive feedback, she continued with it. She later asked her mother for composition books to fill with rhymes and lyrics before she eventually started recording herself.Whack attended The Arts Academy at Benjamin Rush for three years before finishing high school in Atlanta, Georgia. At Benjamin Rush, she was a vocal major, and was one of the few black students in a predominately white graduating class. With some difficulty, she and her friends persuaded their principal to let them perform the finale number from Sister Act 2: Back in the Habit for the school vocal showcase, and Whack performed a rap verse. Later in Whack's career, she toured with Lauryn Hill, who starred in the 1993 film.
At around the age of fifteen, Whack who went by the moniker "Dizzle Dizz" appeared in a 2011 freestyle video produced by Philadelphia's underground music collective We Run the Streets. Her mother drove past the group of men freestyling and encouraged her to join. She released several tracks as Dizzle Dizz, including "Dizzy Rascvls", but struggled with depression in the months following. Despite still being a teenager, Whack gained notoriety in the streets of Philadelphia as "Dizzle Dizz." Despite her growing fame, Whack grew bored. There was no way to make money in freestyling and no way to creatively grow. She claimed there was little experimentation and growth beyond battle rapping if she were to stay in Philadelphia.Her mother elected to move them both out of Philadelphia so Whack could finish school. After moving to Atlanta, Whack began working at a Mister Car Wash, which allowed her to save up for a Mac laptop and start recording her music. She was often the only woman working on the line at the car wash, and her former manager said she was a memorable person with an impressive drive, which Whack credits to her mother.In Atlanta, Whack kept a low profile, having felt the effects of fame back home. She wanted to keep to herself to have a chance to focus solely on her music. By the time she returned to Philadelphia, she had a laptop full of two years' worth of music, which she never ended up sharing with anyone.Whack eventually returned to Philadelphia, leaving her family behind in Atlanta. It was during this time that she was homeless for three months. She hopped around friends' homes but refused to return to Atlanta. She believed staying in Philadelphia would be the best for her music career.


== Musical career ==


=== 2015–2017: Career beginnings ===
By 2015, Whack had moved back to Philadelphia, and she reconnected with Kenete Simms, a sound engineer and music producer whom she knew from her teenage years. Whack credits Simms as her collaborator. It was during this time in which she reconnected with Simms that she learned how to properly mix her own music. Simms helped her learn how to use the equipment in order to help her make music more easily. In 2017, she signed with Interscope Records. Johnny Montina is her manager.In March 2017, Whack made her debut as Tierra Whack with 3 tracks, including "Toe Jam" and "Shit Happens".
In October 2017, Whack released "Mumbo Jumbo", a hip-hop single and accompanying music video that featured the young rapper performing while wearing a mouth prop. Most of the lyrics to the track are purposefully unintelligible. She also toured with Flying Lotus in 2017.


=== 2018–present: Whack World and weekly singles ===
Whack's debut fifteen track album, Whack World, was released on May 30, 2018, and received a "Best New Music" accolade from Pitchfork. Critics praised the unusual format of the album — each song lasting about 1 minute each. Whack released each short track on Instagram, each accompanied by a short film directed by Thibaut Duverneix and Mathieu Léger. The multimedia project received widespread critical acclaim. Robert Christgau gave the album an A-minus and reported in Vice that his wife, fellow critic Carola Dibbell, loved the video, saying "it gave me reason for living".Often referred to as the 'Missy Elliott' of this generation, Whack has gained a great amount of applaud for the creativity and eccentricity of her music videos. The track "Mumbo Jumbo" received a nomination for Best Music Video for the 2019 Grammy Awards. In October 2018, Whack traveled to Tokyo, Japan for a long-term artistic sabbatical.In an episode of Genius's "The Cosign" series on YouTube in which current artists who have been in the industry have the opportunity to watch videos of newer artists, rapper Remy Ma chose to cosign Whack. Despite the fact that she mentioned seeing potential in each of the artists, Remy said, "I pick her because I feel like she brought the entire package as far as the song, the delivery, the vocals, and the actual visual. I feel like she did something that was super out of the ordinary, and I enjoyed it. And I wanna watch it again." In the episode of The Cosign, Whack's music video for her single "Unemployed" was put in a group with music videos from other female MCs including Kash Doll, CupcakKe, Mulatto, Tay Money, and That Girl Lay Lay. She has recorded as-yet-unreleased music with Meek Mill and Childish Gambino.In 2018, she toured with 6lack on his world tour, From East Atlanta with Love. Briana Younger, the writer for The Fader, wrote that "popular and mainstream rap hasn't championed a darker-skinned woman since Missy Elliot...and Whack seems poised to be the one." Whack acknowledged that women in the music industry often aren't afforded the privilege to make art for art's sake, but she refuses to let that inhibit her.Starting February 19, 2019, Whack released one single per week for five weeks in a series she called "#whackhistorymonth." These singles included "Only Child", "Clones", "Gloria", "Wasteland", and "Unemployed".  Whether these tracks will be released under a full-length album has not yet been revealed. Whack has stated that she is not thinking about a timeline for a new album, saying "I'm not gonna drive myself crazy. I'm having fun creating what I'm creating."Whack also collaborated with Flying Lotus on the song "Yellow Belly" for his 2019 album Flamagra and she was later named as one of the members of XXL's "2019 Freshman Class" on June 20, 2019. She appeared at many festivals in the 2019 festival season including Coachella, Primavera Sound, Lollapalooza, Outside Lands, Camp Flog Gnaw, Osheaga, and Austin City Limits. Her song "Unemployed" is featured in the football game FIFA 20.
Whack co-wrote and was featured in Melanie Martinez's single "Copy Cat", which was released on February 10, 2020. This marks the first time that Whack has worked in a professional capacity with Melanie Martinez. In May 2020, Whack would appear alongside American rapper Lil Yachty on the song "T.D" which features rappers ASAP Rocky and Tyler, the Creator. The song would peak at #84 on the Billboard Hot 100, marking Whack's first entry on the chart. Whack would feature on the song "Me x 7" by Alicia Keys, taken from her seventh studio album, Alicia, in September 2020.
Her 2017 single, "Mumbo Jumbo", had an accompanying music video that garnered a Best Music Video nomination for the 2019 Grammy Awards.In October 2020, Whack released her first solo single of the year titled "Dora". In November 2020, Whack appeared in the 2020 Apple holiday commercial "The Magic of Mini" which featured the new singles, "Peppers and Onions" and "feel good" which were released coinciding the commercial.In April 2021, Whack released a single titled "Link". The music video, created in partnership with the LEGO Group, had Tierra Whack sit down with a group of schoolchildren as part of Lego's "Rebuild the World" campaign, using their ideas as inspiration for the video.In December 2021, Whack released three EPs, Rap?, Pop? and R&B?.


== Artistry ==
Whack's beginnings in rap started out in battle rapping, and it is something she looks upon fondly. While she appreciates the foundation that it gave her for her music, she wanted to aim higher than just rap battles. Seeing artists such as Lauryn Hill, Andre 3000, and Eminem had inspired her to become a true artist. In doing so, she would be seen as something more serious than just a battle rapper.Whack cites Outkast, Erykah Badu, Busta Rhymes, and Kelis as some of her musical influences.Whack claims there are many different things that inspire and motivate her and she wants to be able to portray those to her fans in her music. She even credits things such as Sesame Street or No! David  as some of her influences; these are clearly seen through her visuals from her album's music video. Her inspirations come from everything around her; from her relationships to people to inanimate objects. Her single, "Only Child", for example, was created after dating a man whose behavior she aligned with that of someone who grew up an only child.Whack's mother is often credited as one of, if not the, biggest inspirations for her music. She recalls the days her mother would play gangster rap during car rides. For her single, "Unemployed", her mother had actually helped her create the hook for the song.


== Personal life ==
Whack has written poetry since she was a child. Writing was a way for her to deal with her shyness and insecurities. She is also an accomplished spoken word performer.She currently lives in Philadelphia with her mother and two siblings. She is still "Philly-based," saying that Philadelphia is her home and where she feels grounded. She owns a cat, whom she named Starkey after a Whole Foods brand of sparkling water. She does not drink alcohol or smoke cigarettes. She is severely allergic to insects, a condition she satirizes in the music video for her 2018 track, "Bugs Life".


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===


=== Extended plays ===


=== Singles ===


==== As lead artist ====


==== As featured artist ====


=== Guest appearances ===


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Artist profile by Pitchfork
Whack World review by Pitchfork


== External links ==

Tierra Whack discography at DiscogsYves Mondesir (born October 12, 1975) better known by his stage name DJ Whoo Kid, is a Haitian-American hip-hop DJ. He is currently signed to G-Unit Records and its subsidiary label, Shadyville Entertainment. He is the host of The Whoolywood Shuffle on Sirius/XM Radio Shade 45. His mixtapes often incorporate a soundbite of him shouting his own name. He's had two albums chart on the Billboard 200, XXL Presents: Bad Season with Tech N9ne (#118 in 2011) and The Whoodlum Ball with Smith and Hay and Ranna Royce (#156 in 2018).


== Early life ==
DJ Whoo Kid was born 'Yves Mondesir on October 12, 1972, in Brooklyn, New York, and is of Haitian descent. He grew up in Queens Village, New York, and has strong ties to Cap-Haïtien, Haiti.


== Discography ==


=== Hosted mixtapes ===
Steve-O

2008: The Dumbest Asshole In Hip Hop


==== MGK ====
2012: EST 4 Life


==== Raekwon ====
2009: Coke Up in Da Dollar Bill (with DJ Scream)


==== 50 Cent ====
2002: 50 Cent Is the Future
2002: No Mercy, No Fear
2002: God's Plan
2002: Automatic Gunfire
2003: BulletProof Jacket
2007: After Curtis 2007 (G-Unit Radio Special)
2007: Bulletproof The Mixtape
2009: War Angel LP
2009: Forever King


==== Jae Millz ====
2006: Harlem Nights
2010: Dead Presidents


==== Young Buck ====
2003: The Sopranos: The Dirty Reloaded
2004: Welcome To The Hood
2006: Chronic 2006
2006: Pow!!! Radio: Volume 2: Hosted by Young Buck
2007: G-Unit Radio Pt.24 the Clean Up Man
2007: Product of the South
2007: Best of G-Unit Radio (Young Buck Edition)
2015: Before the Beast


==== Lloyd Banks ====
2003: Money in the Bank Part 1
2003: Mo Money in the Bank Part 2
2003: S.W.A.T: Global Mixtape Strike Team
2004: The Hunger For More Tour: Live
2004: Mo Money in the Bank Part 3 – Ca$hing In
2006: Mo Money in the Bank Part 4 – Gang Green Season
2006: Mo Money in the Bank Part 5 – The Final Chapter
2007: Best of Banks
2008: 5 and Better Series Volume 1 – Return of the PLK
2008: 5 and Better Series Volume 2 – Halloween Havoc
2009: 5 and Better Series Volume 3 – The Cold Corner
2009: 5 and Better Series Volume 4 – Reborn
2009: 5 and Better Series Volume 5 – V5


==== Tech N9ne ====
2010: Bad Season (with DJ Scream)


==== Tego Calderón ====
2005: GuasaGuasa


==== Tony Yayo ====
2008: S.O.D
2008: Black Friday
2008: Bloody Xmas
2009: Swine Flu
2009: Swine Flu 2
2009: Public Enemies
2010: Gun Powder Guru 2 (The Remixes) With DJ Scream
2012: Sex, Drugs, & Hip-Hop


==== Waka Flocka Flame ====
2014: "I Can't Rap: Vol. 1"
2015: "Salute Me or Shoot Me 5"


==== Tinie Tempah ====
2010: Micro Mixtape
2011: Foreign Object


==== Spider Loc ====
2006: Bangadoshish (L.A. Kings)
2006: G-Unit Radio Part. 18 (Rags 2 Riches)
2008: Connected: Volume 3: It's The Network
2008: Connected: Volume 4
2009: Connected: Volume 5
2009: The Best of Spider Loc: Volume 1
2009: Reptible
2009: Connected: Volume 6


==== 40 Glocc ====
2008: Outspoken 3 (hosted by DJ Strong & 50 Cent)
2008: I Am Legend
2009: Mo'Fro Presents...


==== G-Unit ====
G-Unit Radio

2003: Smokin' Day 2 (G-Unit Radio Part 1)
2003: International Ballers (G-Unit Radio Part 2)
2003: Takin' It to the Streets (Hosted by LeBron James) (G-Unit Radio Part 3)
2003: No Peace Talks! (G-Unit Radio Part 4)
2004: All Eyez on Us (G-Unit Radio Part 5)
2004: Motion Picture Shit (Hosted by Floyd Mayweather) (G-Unit Radio Part 6)
2004: Footwear by RBK: Volume 1
2004: King of New York (G-Unit Radio Part 7)
2004: The Game: The Fifth Element (Hosted by Steve-O) (G-Unit Radio Part 8)
2004: Young Buck: G-Unit City (G-Unit Radio Part 9)
2005: 2050 Before the Massacre (G-Unit Radio Part 10)
2005: Tony Yayo: Raw-n-Uncut (Hosted by Eminem) (G-Unit Radio Part 11)
2005: Olivia: So Seductive (G-Unit Radio Part 12)
2005: The Return of the Mixtape Millionaire (G-Unit Radio Part 13)
2005: Back to Business (G-Unit Radio Part 14)
2005: Are You a Window Shopper? (G-Unit Radio Part 15)
2006: Mase: Crucified 4 da Hood (G-Unit Radio Part 16)
2006: Mobb Deep: Best in the Bizness (G-Unit Radio Part 17)
2006: Spider Loc: Rags to Riches (G-Unit Radio Part 18)
2006: Freeway: Rep Yo Click (G-Unit Radio Part 19)
2006: Mobb Deep: Best in the Bizness 2 (G-Unit Radio Part 20)
2006: Hate It or Love It (G-Unit Radio Part 21)
2006: Hip Hop Is Dead - Verse 2 (G-Unit Radio Part 22)
U.S. Sales: 900,221
2007: Tony Yayoyo: Finally off Papers (Hosted by Snoop from The Wire) (G-Unit Radio Part 23)
2007: Young Buck: The Clean Up Man (Hosted by LeBron James) (G-Unit Radio Part 24)
2007: Sabrina's Baby Boy (Hosted by Chris Rock) (G-Unit Radio Part 25)This is 50

2008: Return of the Body Snatchers (This is 50 Volume 1)
2008: The Elephant in the Sand (This is 50 Volume 2)
2008: Sincerely Yours Southside(This is 50 Volume 3)
2008: Tony Yayo: S.O.D. (This is 50 Volume 4)G-Unit Radio West

2005: LA American Wasteland (G-Unit Radio West Volume 1)


==== Jay Star ====
2010 "Rise of a Star" (Hosted by "Dj Whoo Kid")


==== Maino ====
2009: Unstoppable


==== Mobb Deep ====
2004: The New Mobb Deep (Hosted by DJ Whoo Kid & the Alchemist)
2000: H.N.I.C. The Mixtape Vol. 1 (Whoo Kid & Prodigy Of Mobb Deep)


==== Mazaradi FOX ====
2007: Fresh Out da Body Shop (Hosted by DJ Whoo Kid, 50 Cent & Mazaradi FOX)


==== Obie Trice ====
2006: Bar Shots
2007: The Most Under Rated
2012: Watch The Chrome


==== Mike Knox ====
2008: Killadelphia (Hosted With Tony Yayo)
2010: Money Machine


==== Lil' Kim ====
2007: Ms. G.O.A.T.
2007: Ms. G.O.A.T. 2


==== Bishop Lamont ====
2008: The Confessional


==== Nyce Da Future ====
2008: 38 in the Head


==== Shawty Lo ====
2009: Fright Night


==== Capone-N-Noreaga ====
2008: CNN Back on that Q.U.Shit


==== Vlad "Haitian V" Calixte ====
2008: New Elevator Music


==== Cashis & Young De ====
2008: Homeland Security


==== Jrocwell ====
2009: Most Anticipated Artist of 2009


==== Nixon Nyce ====
2009: I Can Only Be Me


==== Murda Mixtape (With Stretch Armstrong) ====
1999: Murda Mixtape 2000 Vol. 1
1999: Murda Mixtape 2000 Vol. 2
2000: Murda Mixtape Vol. 3 (Hosted by The LOX)
2000: Murda Mixtape Vol. 4 (Hosted by Capone 'N Noreaga)
2000: Murda Mixtape Vol. 5 (Hosted by Prodigy of Mobb Deep)
2007: Murphy's Law (The New Murda Mixtape)
2009: 45 Ways 2 Die


==== Final Destination (With Stretch Armstrong) ====
2000: Final Destination Vol. 1 - ??? (Hosted by ???)
2000: Final Destination Vol. 2 - Life Ain't a Game (Hosted by Ja Rule)
2001: Final Destination Vol. 3 - Queenz 2 New Orleanz (Hosted by U.T.P.)


==== G.A.G.E. ====
2006: DJ Whoo Kid & Dr. Dre Presents G.A.G.E.
2006: DJ Whoo Kid & Dr. Dre Presents G.A.G.E. - Crack Murder & Missed Meals


==== DeStorm Power ====
2012: Be Careful


==== Tapes ====
1997: 90 Minute Shootout Vol. 1
1997: 90 Minute Shootout Vol. 2
1999: Niggas Don't Want It
2000: Allstar Birthday Bash (hosted by Hype Williams)
2001: Unbreakable (hosted by Eminem)
2001: Escape From New York (hosted by Nas)
2001: Hydro
2002: Hydro Vol. 2
2002: State of Emergency with Dj Kay Slay (hosted by Snoop Dogg)
2003: The Sopranos Mixtape (Dirty Reloaded) (hosted by Young Buck)


==== Set It Off ! ====
2007: Set It Off Vol. 1
2008: Set It Off Vol. 2
2009: Set It Off Vol. 3
2010: Set It Off Vol. 4


==== Snoop Dogg ====
2002: State Of Emergency (With DJ Kay Slay)
2003: Westside Reloaded
2004: The Revival
2004: Welcome To The Chuuch Vol.4: Sunday School
2004: Welcome To The Chuuch Vol.5: Snoop Dogg For President
2007: Tha Blue Carpet Treatment Mixtape (With DJ Drama & DJ Skee)
2008: Landy & Egg Nogg: A DPG Christmas
2009: I Wanna Rock Mixtape (with DJ Skee & DJ Scream)
2010: We Da West (With DJ Skee & DJ Scream)


==== The Afterparty (Blends) ====
1998: The Afterparty Vol. 1 - ??? (Hosted by ???)
1998: The Afterparty Vol. 2 - ??? (Hosted by ???)
1999: The Afterparty Vol. 3 - ??? (Hosted by ???)
2000: The Afterparty Vol. 4 - ??? (Hosted by ???)
2000: The Afterparty Vol. 5 - Southern Heat (Hosted by Lil' Kim)
2000: The Afterparty Vol. 6 - Survivor Ice Party (Hosted by ???)
2000: The Afterparty Vol. 7 - ??? (Hosted by Eminem)
2000: The Afterparty Vol. 8 - QB's Finest (Hosted by Dirty Money Records)
2000: The Afterparty Vol. 9 - Southern Hospitality (Hosted by Sisqó)
2000: The Afterparty Vol. 10 - ??? (Hosted by ???)
2000: The Afterparty Vol. 11 - ??? (Hosted by DJ Clue)
2000: The Afterparty Vol. 12 - ??? (Hosted by ???)
2001: The Afterparty Vol. 13 - ??? (Hosted by P. Diddy & DJ Whoo Kid)
2001: The Afterparty Vol. 14 - City Of Pimps (Hosted by Ron Isley & P. Diddy)


==== POW! ====
2006: POW! Radio Vol. 1
2006: POW! Radio Vol. 2 (With DJ Mandog & Coach PR; Hosted by Young Buck)
2006: POW! Radio Vol. 3 - Mixtapes On A Plane (Hosted by 50 Cent & Samuel L. Jackson)
2006: POW! Radio Vol. 4 - The Transporter (Hosted by Lloyd Banks, Arnold Schwarzenegger & Jason Statham)
2006: POW! Radio Vol. 5 - Pimpin' Pimpin' (Hosted by Katt Williams)
2007: POW! Radio Vol. 6 - Happy Birthday Whoo Kid!
2007: POW! Radio Vol. 7 - Best Of Banks (Hosted by Lloyd Banks)
2007: POW! Radio Vol. 8 - Position Of Power (Hosted by RIZ)
2007: POW! Radio Vol. 9 - The Cons Vol. 5 (Hosted by Consequence)
2008: POW! Radio Vol. 10 - Drug Users Handbook (Hosted by Tony Yayo)
2006: POW! Artist Series Vol. 1 - 50 Cent - Best Of 50 Cent
2006: POW! Artist Series Vol. 2 - Peedi Crakk - Torture (Crakk Is Bakk)
2006: POW! Artist Series Vol. 3 - Obie Trice - The Most Underrated
2006: POW! Artist Series Vol. 4 - Memphis Bleek - Heir To The Throne
2006: POW! Artist Series Vol. 5 - 50 Cent - Best Of 50 Cent 2 (This One's For My Bitches)
2007: POW! Young Buck - Mr. Ten-A-Key Product Of The South


==== The Hyphy Movement (With DJ E-Rock) ====
2005: Bay Bidness The Mixtape
2005: Bay Bidness Vol. 2
2006: Bay Bidness Vol. 3
2006: Bay Bidness Vol. 3.5 (With J-Espinosa)


==== Max Payne ====
2002: Max Payne The Official Mixtape (Queens To New Orleans Vol. 2) (Hosted by Baby & N.O.R.E.)
2002: Max Payne 2 (Hosted by 50 Cent)


==== Canadian Coke ====
2006: Canadian Coke Vol. 1 (Hosted by Kardinal Offishall)
2006: Canadian Coke Vol. 2


==== The New Next ====
2005: The New Next - Moisture Mixtape Lost In Dubai (Hosted by 50 Cent)
2006: Next - The Next Level (Japanese Import)


==== D-Block ====
2003: D-Block The Mixtape
2004: Jadakiss Vs Beanie Sigel - Rap The Vote Mixtape


==== Kool G Rap ====
2005: Dead Or Alive


==== Sam Scarfo ====
2006: The Corner


==== Stat Quo ====
2005: Zone 3 (Hosted by Eminem)


==== Busta Rhymes ====
2004: Surrender The Mixtape


==== Nipsey Hussle ====
2009: Bullets Ain't Got No Names Vol. 3


==== Trav ====
2009: Follow Me


==== 2Pac & Cookin' Soul ====
2009: Night of the Living Dead (2Pac Edition)


==== C-Squared ====
2011: Makaveli vs. Mathers 2


==== M.O.B ====
2011: Awake In A Surgery


==== Max B ====
2008: Public Domain 3
2009: Coke Wave


==== Crooked I ====
2008: Da Block Obama


==== B.G. ====
2008: Champion


==== DJ Paul ====
2010: Too Kill Again (with DJ Scream)


==== J. Cole ====
2007: J Cole, The Come Up, (DJ ill Will)


==== Juicy J & Project Pat ====
2010: Cut Throat 2 (Dinner Thieves), (with DJ Scream)


==== Jay Rock ====
2010: From Hood Tales To The Cover Of XXL, (with DJ Scream)


==== Juvenile ====
2009: Undefeated, With (DJ Scream)


==== Kidd Kidd ====
2009: New Kid On Da Block, With (DJ Scream)


==== Doesya Smoke ====
2008: King Doesya


==== NOE ====
2008: NOE Torious Kid


==== Tupac Shakur, Michael Jackson, the Notorious B.I.G. & Cookin' Soul ====
2008: Night Of The Living Dead
2009: Happy Birthday
2009: Night Of The Living Dead II


==== Sammy Adams ====
2010: Party Records


==== D12 ====
2015: The Devil's Night Mixtape


==== Tinie Tempah ====
2010: Micro Mixtape
2011: Foreign Object (Hosted by Russell Brand)


==== Skepta ====
2011: Community Payback


==== Giggs ====
2011: Take Your Hats Off


==== Wiley ====
2011: Creating A Buzz Volume 1 (Hosted by Ashley Cole)


==== Ghetts ====
2011: Momentum


==== Pink Grenade ====
2014: The Famous As Fuck Tape (Produced by Jonathan Hay and Mike Smith)


==== Eminem ====
2014: Eminem Vs. DJ Whoo Kid Shady Classics


==== Nasty C ====
2020: "Zulu" mixtape


== Filmography ==


== References ==


== External links ==
DJ Whoo Kid
Shadyville Entertainment DJsEdreys Wajed, also known as Billy Drease Williams is an American hip hop artist, emcee, singer and producer from Buffalo, New York; known for his uptempo production, clean lyrics, and motivational messages. Billy Drease Williams started as part of a short lived hip hop group called The Elements (formed with Soulive members Alan Evans and Neal Evans) and later was one half of a duo known as Raw Intel (with producer Trevor "TrevThorne" Drayton). Acclaimed Music critic Jeff Miers has described him as “the most promising, adventurous, nigh-on-visionary hip hop artist Buffalo has yet produced.”Raw Intel found success early, placing five songs on the ESPN NFL 2K5 Video Game, and producing a little-known but highly acclaimed self-titled album in 2002/2003. Billy Drease also collaborated with Soulive again for their Turn It Out Remixed Album and released a project on Velour Records with drummer Alan Evans, entitled M.E.K.A. 54.After the Raw Intel album failed to provide Billy with a viable major label deal, he focused his efforts on production and visual art: placing several tracks on films and television, including Lionsgate Films' "The Farce of the Penguins" and Lifetime Television's "Officer Down"; as well as opening an independent art gallery in Buffalo called Gallery 51. Additionally, he produced several tracks for Atlanta-based rapper, Stat Quo.Soon thereafter, Billy Drease decided to embrace the industry's movement from mainstream to indie  and signed a deal with Buffalo-based independent label Deep Thinka Records, which then proceeded to re-brand themselves as DTR45. Creatively invigorated by the deal, Billy's first single "I Like It" – a raw chopped up rendition of a Betty Wright tune –  secured features in Billboard Magazine and on Myspace; and the accompanying music video was featured by YouTube and BET.Originally performing as solo artist under his birth name, Edreys decided to take on the moniker Billy Drease Williams right around the same time I Like It dropped. This change in stage name was both in homage to the actor Billy Dee Williams and as a way for the pronunciation of birth name to still be present within his stage name. Billy Drease Williams has released three albums with Deep Thinka Records / DTR45, including Good Morning Amy – an inspirational hip hop album which garnered Grammy buzz  – and made several high profile features and appearances, including Warped Tour, NXNE, and CMJ Music Marathon performances. His hit single, Just Doin' It has proven to be his biggest commercial success to date, and the groundbreaking music video has received over half a million views to date.


== The Art of Hip-Hop ==
Billy Drease is the Executive Director of The Art of Hip Hop, a not for profit organization dedicated
to "Educating the Future and Celebrating a Culture", achieved through the following guidelines:

To educate the public on the importance of the preservation, appreciation and positive influences of the culture of Hip-Hop and all forms of music.
To produce programming designed to improve scholastic abilities in math, reading and the sciences through after school tutoring, mentor-ship and educational excursions to help fight juvenile delinquency.
To utilize the business behind the music industry to teach youth about entrepreneurship and business functions.
To utilize the visual arts in helping youth express emotion and life issues, and help eliminate prejudice, discrimination and violence.The Art of Hip Hop has been celebrated as an event/festival in Buffalo the past years, and is currently on its fifth installment.


== Career highlights ==
2019: Solo exhibition entitled PLAYLIST received recognition while on view at Flight Gallery Buffalo.
2017: Selected as one of four artists to create The Freedom Wall, an art installation located in Buffalo, New York.
2012: Cover Feature of Buffalo Spree Magazine, as a Buffalo Game Changer.
2010: Featured Performer at YouTube Musician's Wanted Showcase at CMJ New Music Marathon
2010: Awarded 'Artvoice' Best in Buffalo Hip Hop Artist for 2010
2010: Cast as the lead for "Death of a King", a hip-hop rendition of Hamlet.
2009: Selected Showcase Performer for NXNE Festival in Toronto
2009: Awarded ‘Artvoice’ Best in Buffalo Hip Hop Artist for 2009
2009: Featured Performer for Hard Rock Cafe’s ‘March on Stage’ Event
2009: Named one of URB Magazine‘s Next 1000 Artists
2008: First Hip Hop Artist selected for WBFO Live Concert Series
2008: Performer on 2008 Warped Tour Skull Candy Stage
2008: 'Now Hear This' feature in Billboard Magazine
2008: Featured Artist of the Week on Myspace Music
2008: "I Like It" / "DUI" peaks at #4 on College/Internet Radio Charts
2007: Lions Gate Movie: "Farce of the Penguins", Produced track for artist Flame
2007: First Place Winner – HOK Production Slam Poetry Contest
2006: HBO 'Unscripted' Reality Show, Produced track for artist Flame
2006: Lifetime Television Movie: "Officer Down", Co-Produced and wrote song for outtake: "Gang Wars"
2005: 4 tracks placed on ESPN debut video game ESPN Football 2K5 (800k sold) as a part of group Raw Intel
2004: Starred in Documentary by Ivan Rodriguez. "The Art of Hip Hop: A Short"
2002: 12" single with B side deal with Velour Records-NY/Red Ink Distribution
2002: Reebok Nationwide Radio Promotion for RBK product branding
2001: Buffalo Music Awards winner for "Best Hip Hop Producer"
1999: Buffalo Music Awards winner for "Best Hip Hop Artist"


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===


== References ==


== External links ==
Billy Drease's Official Web Site
GMA Official Web Site
DTR45, Billy Drease's label
Edreys Wajed Blog
Billy's Myspace page
"Adam's World: Artist Of The Week – Edreys". adambernard.blogspot.com. Retrieved 2014-06-11.
"Edreys - The Sidewalk Scholar - Interview". March 31, 2008. Archived from the original on 2008-04-08. Retrieved 2014-06-11.
"realraptalk.com". realraptalk.com. Retrieved 2014-06-11.
"Edreys Exclusive Interview". femalefirst.co.uk. Retrieved 2014-06-11.
"thisistomorrow.blogspot.com - Internet Archive Wayback Machine". Archived from the original on 2008-05-05. Retrieved 2014-06-27. {{cite web}}: Cite uses generic title (help)
http://www.buffalonews.com/incoming/article9301.ece
[2]
http://www.buffalonews.com/incoming/article9215.ece
"the art of hiphop at the yard | Search Results | Buffalo Rising". archives.buffalorising.com. Archived from the original on 2016-02-01. Retrieved 2014-06-11.
"the art of hip hop 3 at the al 2 | Search Results | Buffalo Rising". archives.buffalorising.com. Archived from the original on 2012-11-10. Retrieved 2014-06-11.
"Billy Drease Williams: Good Morning Amy CD release party | Buffalo Rising". buffalorising.com. Archived from the original on 2012-03-11. Retrieved 2014-06-11.Saul Stacey Williams (born February 29, 1972) is an American rapper, singer, songwriter, musician, poet, writer, and actor. He is known for his blend of poetry and alternative hip hop, and for his lead roles in the 1998 independent film Slam and the 2013 jukebox musical Holler If Ya Hear Me.


== Early life ==
Saul Stacey Williams was born in Newburgh, New York, on February 29, 1972, the youngest of three children. He attended Newburgh Free Academy, where he wrote his song "Black Stacey". He graduated from Morehouse College with a BA in acting and philosophy, then moved to New York City, where he earned an MFA in acting from New York University's Graduate Acting Program at the Tisch School of the Arts. While at New York University, he became part of the New York café poetry scene. He also lived in Brazil as an exchange student from 1988 to 1989.


== Career ==


=== Poetry ===
By 1995, Williams had become an open mic poet. In 1996, he won the title of Nuyorican Poets Cafe's Grand Slam Champion. The documentary film SlamNation follows Williams and the other members of the 1996 Nuyorican Poets Slam team (Beau Sia, muMs da Schemer, and Jessica Care Moore) as they compete in the 1996 National Poetry Slam held in Portland, Oregon. The following year, Williams landed the lead role in the 1998 feature film Slam. Williams featured as both a writer and actor in the film, which would win both the Sundance Festival Grand Jury Prize and the Cannes Camera D'Or (Golden Camera).


=== Music ===
Around 1998, Williams was also breaking into music. He had performed with such artists as Nas, The Fugees, Christian Alvarez, Blackalicious, Erykah Badu, KRS-One, Zack De La Rocha, De La Soul, Buckethead, and DJ Krust, as well as poets Allen Ginsberg and Sonia Sanchez. After releasing a string of EPs, he released the LP Amethyst Rock Star with producer Rick Rubin in 2001. In September 2004, he released his self-titled album to much acclaim. He played several shows supporting Nine Inch Nails on their European tour in summer 2005, and has also supported The Mars Volta. Williams was invited to the Lollapalooza music festival around that time, and the Chicago stage allowed Williams to attract a wider audience. He appeared on the Nine Inch Nails album Year Zero, and supported the group on their 2006 tour of North America. On the tour, Williams announced that Trent Reznor would co-produce his next album.This collaboration resulted in 2007's The Inevitable Rise and Liberation of NiggyTardust!. The album was available only from its website until a physical CD was issued, featuring new tracks and extended album artwork. The first 100,000 customers on the website had the option to download a free lower-quality audio version of the album. The other option was for users to pay $5 to support the artist directly and be given the choice of downloading the higher-quality MP3 version or the lossless FLAC version. The material was produced by Trent Reznor and mixed by Alan Moulder. It was Reznor who said, after his own recent dealings with record labels, that they should release it independently and directly to the audience.In early 2008, a Nike Sparq Training commercial featured Williams' song "List of Demands (Reparations)". In a November 2008 interview with Wired.com, Williams talked about his forthcoming projects: "There's one album that I'm waist-deep into. I'm aiming to finish it up next month. Trent wants to work on a sequel for Niggy that I think would be cool, and I also have an album and new songs demoed at home that I'm ready to go into the studio and lay down. It’s a complete reflection of how I feel in this country; it's a very transformative time."Williams' fourth album, Volcanic Sunlight, was released on November 11, 2011. Williams showcased the album at London's Hoxton Bar Kitchen on January 26, 2011. Livemusic interviewed Williams on the evening and made a subsequent film, produced by artist Alex Templeton-Ward. When Williams was asked what the point of poetry was, he said: "I'm making this up, I have no idea but here we go. I think that it would be to express, to share, to relieve, to explore. For me, poetry offers some what of a cathartic experience. I am able to move through emotions and emotional experience particularly, you know, break-ups, difficulties in all the things that I may face, whether that is with an industry or a loved one or whomever, there needs to be an infiltration process, like you have a window open over there. That is the purpose of poetry: it is the window that opens, that allows some air in, some other insight, some other possibility so we can explore all that we feel, all that we think but with the space to see more than what we know, because there is so much more than we know. If I didn't open myself to the possibilities of the unknown, then I would be lost."
Williams' fifth album, MartyrLoserKing, was released on January 29, 2016. The first single released from the album was "Burundi", a collaboration with Emily Kokal of Warpaint.In March 2018, The Kills released their cover of Williams' "List of Demands (Reparations)" and Williams opened for The Kills' sold-out performance at the Regent Theater in Los Angeles on August 13, 2018.


=== Writing ===
As a writer, Williams has been published in The New York Times, Esquire, Bomb Magazine, and African Voices, as well as releasing four collections of poetry. As a poet and musician, Williams has toured and lectured across the world, appearing at many universities and colleges. In his interview in the book Words in Your Face: A Guided Tour Through Twenty Years of the New York City Poetry Slam, Williams explained why he creates within so many genres: "It's not that I balance those arts out, all the different arts balance me out. So, that there is a certain type of emotion that is more easily accessible through music than poetry... some things are meant to be written, some are meant to be sung, some things are meant to be hummed, some things are made to be yelled, and so that's just how life works."In January 2009, he released NGH WHT – The Dead Emcee Scrolls with The Arditti Quartet, a reading of his 2006 poetry book of the same name. This collaboration with Thomas Kessler (who also set Williams' spoken-word track ",said the shotgun to the head" to music) was released with two payment options: listeners could download chapters 18 to 22 of the 27-minute composition in MP3 format for free, or could download the entire 33-chapter composition in lossless AIFF format for $6, along with the isolated vocal and quartet multitracks. The entire paid download totalled in size at 563 megabytes. Williams contributed to two tracks on the 2011 album Baba Love by Arthur H.


=== Acting ===
Williams starred in Slam (1998) and Today (2012). On stage, he was chosen for the lead role in Holler If Ya Hear Me, a Broadway musical featuring music by Tupac Shakur. Though it features Shakur's music, the musical is not about his life. It is an original script written by Todd Kreidler. Rolling Stone described the production as "the first hip-hop jukebox musical in Broadway history". The show opened on June 19, 2014. Williams' role in the musical landed him an interview on The Colbert Report, where he spoke about his career and performed a poem entitled "Amethyst Rocks".He received a Canadian Screen Award nomination for Best Actor at the 9th Canadian Screen Awards in 2021, for his performance in the film Akilla's Escape.


=== Directing ===
In 2021, Neptune Frost, which Williams wrote and co-directed with Anisia Uzeyman, premiered in Cannes at Directors' Fortnight. The film was supported by a successful Kickstarter campaign in 2018.


== Personal life ==
Williams is a vegan. He is a vocal critic of the War on Terrorism and the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan. Among his better-known works are the anti-war anthems "Not in My Name" and "Act III Scene 2 (Shakespeare)". In 2011, he added his name to Occupy Musicians, supporting the worldwide Occupy movement against income inequality. He identifies as queer.Williams and Marcia Jones, a visual artist and art professor, began their relationship in 1995 as collaborative artists on the Brooklyn performance art and spoken word poetry circuit. Their daughter, Saturn, was born in 1996. A collection of poems by Williams entitled S/HE is a series of reflections on the demise of his relationship with Jones. Jones created the cover artwork for The Seventh Octave, images throughout S/HE in response to Williams, and set-designed his 2001 album Amethyst Rock Star. Saturn performed with her father on his 2008 concert tour. Williams also has a son named Xuly with renowned choreographer Fatima Robinson.On February 29, 2008 (his 36th birthday), Williams married actress Persia White after a five-year relationship. They met when he made a guest appearance on the series Girlfriends. On January 17, 2009, White announced via her Myspace blog that she and Williams were no longer together. He is now married to actress Anisia Uzeyman. He lived in Paris for four years but now resides in Los Angeles.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===
Amethyst Rock Star (2001)
Saul Williams (2004)
The Inevitable Rise and Liberation of NiggyTardust! (2007)
NGH WHT (2009) (with Arditti Quartet)
Volcanic Sunlight (2011)
MartyrLoserKing (2016)
Encrypted & Vulnerable (2019)
Unanimous Goldmine (The Original Soundtrack of "Neptune Frost") (2022)


=== Compilation albums ===
Real Niggery Volume One (2005)
These Mthrfckrs: MartyrLoserKing - Remixes, B-Sides, & Demos (2016)


=== EPs ===
Not in My Name (2003)


=== Singles ===
"Elohim (1972)" (1998)
"Penny for a Thought" b/w "Purple Pigeons" (2000)
"List of Demands (Reparations)" (2004)
"Black Stacey" (2005)
"The Flaw You Worship" (2018)
"Worship And Prayer" b/w "Kanye West" (2019)
"Three Big Balls" (2019)


=== Guest appearances ===


== Bibliography ==
The Seventh Octave, 1998, Moore Black Press, ISBN 0-9658308-1-0
She, 1999, MTV/Pocketbooks, ISBN 0-671-03977-6
Said the Shotgun to the Head, 2003, MTV/Pocketbooks, ISBN 0-7434-7079-6
The Dead Emcee Scrolls, 2006, MTV/Pocketbooks, ISBN 1-4165-1632-8
Chorus, 2012,
US (a.), 2015, Gallery Books/MTV Books, ISBN 9781476779324


== Filmography ==


=== Film ===
Slam (1998)
SlamNation (1998)
Downtown 81 (voice) (1981/2000)
Underground Voices (1996)
I'll Make Me a World (1999)
King of the Korner (2000)
K-PAX (2001)
The N-Word (2004)
Lackawanna Blues (2005)
Today (2012)
Akilla's Escape (2020)
Neptune Frost (2021)
Pussy Island (TBA)


=== Television ===
Girlfriends (2003)
The Colbert Report (2014)


== References ==


== External links ==

Saul Williams – official site
Saul Williams discography at Discogs 
Saul Williams at IMDb
Saul Williams: Volcanic Sunlight
Interview with Saul Williams (via Talk Rock To Me) May 4, 2012Tyler James Williams (born October 9, 1992) is an American actor. He began his career as a child actor, making several appearances on Saturday Night Live, Little Bill, and Sesame Street. Williams later rose to prominence for playing the role of Chris Rock on the UPN/CW sitcom Everybody Hates Chris (2005–09). Following this, he starred as songwriter Cyrus DeBarge in the Disney Channel film Let It Shine (2012), and Noah on the AMC horror television series The Walking Dead (2014–15).He currently stars as Gregory Eddie on the ABC sitcom Abbott Elementary, for which he received critical acclaim as well as a Golden Globe Award, a Screen Actors Guild Award and two nominations for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Comedy Series.
Additionally, Williams has also appeared in films such as Detroit (2017) and The United States vs. Billie Holiday (2021).


== Early life ==
Williams was born in Westchester County, New York, and grew up in Yonkers, New York. His mother, Angela Williams, is a counselor, and his father, Le'Roy Williams, is a teacher and retired police sergeant. Williams has two younger siblings; Tyrel Jackson Williams (b. 1997) and Tylen Jacob Williams (b. 2001), both are actors.


== Career ==
Williams began his acting career at age 4. He later starred in Little Bill as the voice of Bobby, briefly replacing Devon Malik Beckford in 2000, and played himself (or an eponymous character, "Tyler") on the PBS series Sesame Street from 2000 to 2005. He rose to fame in September 2005 by playing the title character in the hit series Everybody Hates Chris, which finished in May 2009. He won a Young Artist Award in 2007 for his work on the show. He was also a guest star in Two for the Money, Law & Order: Special Victims Unit, and the show Hi-Jinks. In late 2009, Williams appeared in the second season of True Jackson, VP as True's love interest Justin "Lil' Shakespeare" Weber in the two-part episode "Flirting with Fame."In 2012, Williams got the role of Owen in the series Go On. He also played the lead role of Cyrus DeBarge in the Disney Channel film Let It Shine alongside Coco Jones, Trevor Jackson, and Brandon Mychal Smith. Williams was also featured on nine songs on the film's soundtrack, showing off his rapping skills. The film premiered on June 15, 2012, and his songs "Don't Run Away," "Me and You," "Guardian Angel," "Let It Shine" and "Moment of Truth" all received airplay on Radio Disney. The videos were also played frequently on the Disney Channel. Williams also guest starred in the Disney XD series Lab Rats as a future version of the character played by his younger brother Tyrel Jackson Williams.In 2014, Williams starred in Justin Simien's independent film Dear White People as Lionel Higgins, and was cast as the recurring character Noah on the television series The Walking Dead. In 2016, Williams played Russ "Monty" Montgomery in the Criminal Minds spin-off Criminal Minds: Beyond Borders. In 2017, Williams was diagnosed with Crohn's disease after experiencing symptoms for three years. Since his diagnosis, he has undergone treatment, including multiple surgeries. In 2019, Williams was cast as Jake in The Wedding Year, a teen romantic comedy film directed by Robert Luketic and starring Sarah Hyland, Jenna Dewan, Matt Shively, and Anna Camp.In 2020, Williams played the role of Paul in The Argument. In 2021, he began playing the role of Gregory Eddie in the ABC Mockumentary sitcom Abbott Elementary. At the 74th Primetime Emmy Awards, Williams earned a nomination for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Comedy Series for the role.


== Filmography ==


=== Film ===


=== Television ===


== Awards and nominations ==


=== Black Reel Awards ===


=== Golden Globe Awards ===


=== Hollywood Critics Association TV Awards ===


=== NAACP Image Award ===


=== Primetime Emmy Awards ===


=== Screen Actors Guild Awards ===


=== Teen Choice Awards ===


=== Young Artist Awards ===


=== Peabody Award ===


== Discography ==
Let It Shine Soundtrack (2012)
Me, My Brother, And A Mic (2015)


== References ==


== External links ==
Tyler James Williams at IMDbLeonardo Roman (born August 20, 1965), better known by his stage name Wise, is an American hip hop record producer and member of hip hop group Stetsasonic, commonly hailed as hip hop's first live band.


== Early life ==
Born in Fajardo, Puerto Rico, Wise moved to the Bronx, New York, where his parents resided with his two older brothers Juan & Jose. At the age of four, his family moved to East New York, Brooklyn, New York.


== Hip hop career ==
Daddy-O and MC Delite were the founding members of the group Stetsasonic, then known as the Stetsasonic 3 MC's, in 1981. Joining the group in 1983, the group had another level of creativity and talent with the presence of the PRINCE OF SOUND himself, who is also known in the group by the moniker the Stetsa-Human Mix Machine provided beatboxing and other human percussion. Also, what many didn't know was that he was the very first Latino human beat box to hit the hip hop scene.
Wise debuted his Human Turntable technique of beatboxing on the band's first single called "Just Say Stet" b/w "Rock de la Stet," which was released in 1985. There was also another single from the album in which Wise and Daddy-O collaborated. While Daddy-O performs the vocals, Wise gives his version of "Impeach the President," which happens to be the very first time that a human beatbox was heard adding a song-like rhythm to the beat that was coming out of his mouth on the song "Faye" which was on the group's first album, On Fire (1986). With Stetsasonic, Wise toured the world with rap acts like Run-DMC, LL Cool J, Whodini, Eric B. & Rakim, EPMD and Public Enemy.
In 1989, Wise (with fellow Stetsasonic members Daddy-O, Delite, and Fruitkwan) participated in KRS-One's Stop the Violence Movement, an assembly of hip hop artists including Kool Moe Dee, Heavy D, MC Lyte, Public Enemy, and Doug E. Fresh. This artistic collaboration yielded the posse cut "Self Destruction", a protest song decrying black-on-black violence and media stigmatisation of all hip hop as violent. Unusually, Wise was featured not as a human percussionist, but as a vocalist, sharing his verse with Daddy-O. Released in 1989, the single reached #75 in the US Top 40.
Wise has also participated in a few commercials in which he lends his beatbox sounds. One was for Campbell's Soup in which a cartoon of a B-boy bear kicks a ferocious beat. This commercial was aired amidst Saturday morning cartoons.
Wise was also featured in a documentary on the art of the human beatbox, Breath Control: The History of the Human Beat Box, which was shown at the Tribeca Film Festival and also featured fellow human percussionists such as Doug E. Fresh, Biz Markie, Ready Rock C and Emanon.
These days Wise & Stetsasonic are presently working on their new album that is scheduled for release in 2022. In this album, Wise is more vocal and less percussionist as his skills have grown greatly. While his moniker as a human percussionist/beatbox is The Human Mix Machine, his new moniker as a Vocalist/MC is Lito Brigante.


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===
On Fire (1986)
In Full Gear (1988)
Blood, Sweat & No Tears (1991)
People In The Neighborhood EP/ Chopped Herring Records (1991)
Here We Go Again (2022)


=== Singles ===
"Just Say Stet" (1985)
"Go Stetsa 1" (1986)
"Faye/Forever My Beat" (1986)
"A.F.R.I.C.A. (1986)
"Float On" (1988)
"Sally" (1988)
"Talkin' All That Jazz" (1988)
"Speaking Of A Girl Named Suzy (1990)
"No B.S. Allowed" (1991)
"(Now Ya'll Givin' Up) Love" (2020)


=== Credits ===
On Fire - Stetsasonic / Tommy Boy Records (1986) Producer, Vocals
DBC Let The Music Play - Stetsasonic / Tommy Boy Records (1988) Producer, Vocals
Float On - Stetsasonic / Tommy Boy Records (1988) Producer, Vocals
Stet Troop '88 - Stetsasonic / Tommy Boy Records (1988) Producer, Vocals
No BS Allowed - Stetsasonic / Tommy Boy Records (1991) Producer, Vocals
Uda Man - Stetsasonic / Tommy Boy Records (1991) Producer, Vocals
Speaking Of A Girl Named Suzy - Stetsasonic / Tommy Boy Records (1991) Producer, Vocals
Go Brooklyn 3 - Stetsasonic / Tommy Boy Records (1991) Producer, Vocals
Heaven Help The M.F.'s - Stetsasonic / Tommy Boy Records (1991) Producer, Vocals
Took Place In East New York - Stetsasonic / Tommy Boy Records (1991) Producer, Vocals
Free South Africa [Remix] - Stetsasonic / Tommy Boy Records (1991) Producer, Vocals
People In The Neighborhood - Stetsasonic / Chopped Herring Records (1991) Producer, Vocals


=== Guest appearances ===
Self Destruction - The Stop The Violence Movement / Jive Records (1989)
Human Element: The World's First Human Beatbox Compilation / 108 Records (2006)


== References ==


== External links ==
Wise at IMDbKevin Lee "Chevy" Woods (born May 13, 1981) is an American rapper and songwriter from Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Throughout his career he has been affiliated with rapper Wiz Khalifa and his respective Taylor Gang record label, also serving as Khalifa's hypeman on tour. His first major appearance was on Wiz Khalifa's song "Taylor Gang". Woods has been on more than 20 tours and has released several mixtapes including The Cookout with Khalifa and the Gangland series.


== Career ==


=== 2003–2010: Early career, Taylor Gang formation and mixtapes ===
Woods started rapping as a child with friends using instrumentals for background music. After graduating high school, he attended Robert Morris University as an athlete and grew his passion for rapping. Woods became serious about rap when he met another musician who created and distributed his own mixtapes. He wanted to pursue music and began writing and rapping under the name Kev Tha Hustla.In 2004, he met fellow Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania rapper Wiz Khalifa, through Pennsylvania producers I.D. Labs, who collaborated with Khalifa. Woods and Khalifa formed a partnership, which led to the formation of the group Taylor Gang in 2008. Woods released two mixtapes, The Corner's Correspondent in 2008 and Animal in 2009. His first two mixtapes featured collaborations with Wiz Khalifa, Boaz and members of Heavy Hustle Records. Production was primarily handled by I.D. Labs and Sledgren. On August 3, 2010, Woods was featured on the track “Paper Route” from Mac Miller's mixtape K.I.D.S. In September 2010, Woods released his third official mixtape Pilot Shit.


=== 2011: Red Cup Music and The Cookout ===
In February 2011, Wiz Khalifa released his ninth mixtape, Cabin Fever, which featured Woods on three tracks, including "Taylor Gang", "Middle of You" and "Homicide".  Woods released his fourth mixtape Red Cup Music, which featured guest appearances by Juicy J, French Montana, and production by ID Labs and Mac Miller in March 2011. Woods told MTV, the Red Cup Music was "really when I found a style for myself, some laid-back, cool music. Drink a little bit, smoke a little bit." Khalifa released the music video for the Lex Luger-produced track "Taylor Gang" in April 2011, which became an iTunes bonus track on Khalifa's debut studio album Rolling Papers. The song peaked at number 22 on the Billboard Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart. In April 2013, Khalifa went on tour in support of Rolling Papers with Woods and Big Sean. This tour introduced Woods to Khalifa's mainstream audience. In August 2011, Woods released a mixtape, titled The Cookout, which featured Wiz Khalifa.After Khalifa officially founded Taylor Gang Records, Woods was immediately added to the roster. The Cookout mixtape, produced by ID Labs, Sledgren, Cardo, Key Wane and Big Jerm, was released in September 2011 and featured Wiz Khalifa on eight of the eleven tracks. The mixtape received positive reviews from XXL, who praised the production, but mentioned Woods was overshadowed by Khalifa throughout the tape. However, MTV disagreed calling Woods the mixtape's star and praised his laid back flow.


=== 2012-2015: Gangland mixtape series and The 48 Hunnid Project ===
In 2012, Woods released a new mixtape, titled Gangland, which consisted of dark material influenced by Woods early life on the streets, and the television show Gangland. Woods along with the rest of Taylor Gang Records, Lola Monroe, Juicy J, and Wiz Khalifa appeared on the May 2012 cover of The Source. Gangland, produced by Lex Luger, I.D. Labs, Cardo, Sonny Digital, Key Wane, Sledgren and Harry Fraud, was released in June 2012 and featured Taylor Gang's Wiz Khalifa, Lola Monroe, Juicy J, Tuki Carter, as well as artists Soulja Boy, Trae Tha Truth, and Young Jerz. In a XXL review of Gangland, the magazine stated, "Over the past two years, Taylor Gang's Chevy Woods has gradually built up his name with mixtapes like Red Cup Music and The Cookout. Progressing with each release, Wiz's budding sidekick has shown he can hang high without resting on the back of his co-pilot. On his latest offering, Gang Land, Chevy flies high and gives the world an in depth look into his life as a Taylor Gang aviator."
Following the release of Gangland, Woods worked on his next mixtape and his debut studio album. Woods went on the first Under the Influence of Music concert tour with Khalifa, Mac Miller, Schoolboy Q and Kendrick Lamar in support of Gangland in July and August 2012, . He toured with the rest of Taylor Gang Records on the 2050 Tour from October through December 2012. During the tour, Woods announced that his next mixtape would be titled Gangland 2. In 2013, he toured on the second Under the Influence tour with Khalifa, ASAP Mob, B.o.B, Joey Badass, Ty Dolla Sign, Pro Era, Berner, and Trinidad James.In August 2013, Woods told HotNewHipHop, his debut album would contain production by Sledgren and C4, the track list for Gangland 2 was finalized, and it would be hosted by DJ Drama. Woods released the cover artwork for Gangland 2 in September 2013. He toured North America with Joey Badass, Ab-Soul, The Underachievers, and Pro Era on the fourth annual The Smoker's Club tour in October and November 2013. Woods released Gangland 2, a mixtape featuring guest appearances from Wiz Khalifa, Juicy J, Trinidad James, Young Scooter, King Los and Compton Menace, via Taylor Gang Records in October 2013. Woods released his first retail single "30 Deep" via Taylor Gang in April 2014 and announced in September 2014 that he would release a retail EP. He made two appearances on Wiz Khalifa's third studio album Blacc Hollywood, on "Still Down" and spoke on the intro to the album. Woods toured with rapper Kevin Gates in July and August 2014.In January 2015, Woods released the third installment of his Gangland series featuring production from Ricky P, Zaytoven, Sonny Digital, Ty Dolla Sign and more. In August 2015, Woods produced and released The 48 Hunnid Project, his first retail release. The project named for the neighborhood where Woods was raised, took 12 years to create and encompassed his experiences from being a child through adulthood. He also toured with Wiz Khalifa on the Boys of Zummer Tour with Fall Out Boy.


=== 2016-2017: TGOD Volume 1, Gang Sh*t Only, and Thanks For Everything ===
On February 26, 2016, Chevy woods released a 4 track extended play called And The Story Goes. On October 11, 2016 Taylor Gang Records released a compilation mixtape titled TGOD Volume 1 with all the members including Wiz Khalifa, Berner, Juicy J, Ty Dolla $ign among others. On November 11, 2016, Gang Sh*t Only was released with features from Wiz Khalifa, Hardo, Stevie B, FTR Drama and Rich The Kid with production Honorable C.N.O.T.E., 808 Mafia, K.E. on the Track among others. On May 13, 2017, Chevy Woods released a 14 track mixtape titled Freemix 1.5 Reloaded. Exactly What They Want was released on September 28, 2017, with features from Wiz Khalifa, Bigga Rankin and K Camp with production from K.E. on the Track, Yung Lan, Stevie B among others. Thanks For Everything was released on December 23, 2017, with features from Wiz Khalifa on the tracks All Love and Joint & A Lighter with production from K.E. on the Track, Yung Lan, OG Parker among others.


=== 2018-present: 81, Lewis Park Legend and New 90's ===
On June 15, 2018, Chevy Woods released the mixtape titled 81 with a feature from Wiz Khalifa on the track Bitch You Lyin and production from K.E. on the Track, Tay Keith, Beat Mechanics among others. On December 19, 2018, Chevy Woods dropped a new mixtape titled Lewis Park Legend. On May 13, 2019, Chevy Woods released a new mixtape titled New 90's. On July 3, 2020, Chevy Woods dropped a debut album titled Since Birth.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===


=== Extended plays ===


=== Mixtapes ===


=== Singles ===


==== As lead artist ====


=== Other charted songs ===


== References ==


== External links ==
Official site
Chevy Woods on Twitter
Chevy Woods on YouTubeTravon DaShawn Frank Smart (January 13, 1997 – June 18, 2018), better known by his stage name Jimmy Wopo, was an American rapper from Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
Wopo was an affiliate of fellow Pittsburgh-based rapper Wiz Khalifa and his Taylor Gang imprint. He made his first high-profile appearance with his 2016 breakout single, "Elm Street", produced by Stvii B, which Complex included in the "'Bout to Blow: 10 Dope New Songs You Should Be Hearing Everywhere Soon" list. Following that success, he collaborated with several prominent rappers including Wiz Khalifa, Sonny Digital, 21 Savage and more. After receiving a co-sign from hip hop producer Mike Will Made It, rap duo Rae Sremmurd brought Wopo out to perform during their set at the Pittsburgh stop of their SremmLife 2 Tour. Wopo was murdered in a drive-by shooting on June 18, 2018.


== Career ==
In January 2015, Wopo began uploading original tracks to his SoundCloud account. Taylor Maglin, the owner of the Pittsburgh-based blog Daily Loud, partnered with him and began to publicize his music. This additional push helped him to accumulate millions of views on his music videos on his YouTube channel. Joining the wave of Wopo's viral success, urban hip hop blog WorldStarHipHop exclusively debuted five of his music videos in 2016. On July 24, 2016, he premiered his debut project, Woponese, on Daily Loud. This 8-track mixtape included the single "Back Door", which features Sonny Digital. In October 2016, Riff Raff tapped Wopo for a feature on the track "Stay Away from You" on his Balloween mixtape. On November 25, 2016, he released a joint album with his fellow Pittsburgh-based rapper Hardo. This nine-track project featured ShadyHigler, 21 Savage and Wiz Khalifa.As many as fifty completed, unreleased songs will be released posthumously, according to Wopo's manager.


== Legal issues ==
On February 7, 2016, Wopo was arrested during a traffic stop in Washington County, Pennsylvania. Police arrested Wopo and two others after finding two stamp bags of suspected heroin and a small amount of marijuana. He was arraigned on drug charges and drinking charges and placed in jail with a $25,000 bond. Later, while out, Wopo, landed in jail because of probation violation. Wopo failed to inform officials of his trip to New York State, where he was caught and imprisoned on such charges. While in jail, he wrote an album, Back Against the Wall, which he recorded the first day he got out of jail.


== Death ==
At 4:22 PM EDT on June 18, 2018, Smart and a male passenger were shot in Pittsburgh's Hill District neighborhood. The passenger survived, but Smart, who was shot in the head, died after being rushed to the UPMC Presbyterian at 5:56 PM. He was 21 years old, and left behind three children. As of 2023, no one has been charged for the murder.
Smart has been posthumously implicated in numerous gang related crimes. Multiple members of his gang were sentenced to prison in 2021.


== Discography ==
Woponese (2016)
Trapnese (2016) (with Hardo)
Jordan Kobe (2017)
Back Against the Wall (2017)


== References ==


== External links ==
Jimmy Wopo discography at DiscogsVinson Jamel Johnson, better known by his stage name Wordsworth, is an American rapper from Brooklyn, New York.


== Biography ==
Wordsworth grew up in Brooklyn, New York. He started rapping in fifth grade. He graduated from the State University of New York at Old Westbury and the University of Miami.Wordsworth recorded with his partner Punchline on A Tribe Called Quest's The Love Movement and on Black Star's Mos Def & Talib Kweli Are Black Star. He was involved in the MTV comedy sketch series The Lyricist Lounge Show. He also appeared in the Kevin Fitzgerald film Freestyle: The Art of Rhyme. In 2004, he released his debut solo studio album, Mirror Music. In 2012, he released another solo studio album, The Photo Album.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===
Mirror Music (2004)
The Photo Album (2012)
New Beginning (2015) (with Donel Smokes)
Our World Today (2017) (with Sam Brown)
Champion Sounds (2019) (with Pearl Gates)
Fragility of Life (2021)


=== EPs ===
Punch n' Words (2000) (with Punchline)
Blame It on the Music (2016) (with Jsoul)
Undivided Attention (2021) (with Jay-EF)


=== Singles ===
"On Your Feet" / "That Way" (2002)
"Thanks for Coming Out" (2003)
"Bosoms" (2003) (with J-Live and Soulive)
"Not Me" / "Wildlife" (2003)
"Buy Time" (2014)


=== Guest appearances ===
A Tribe Called Quest - "Rock Rock Y'all" from The Love Movement (1998)
Black Star - "Twice Inna Lifetime" from Mos Def & Talib Kweli Are Black Star (1998)
The High & Mighty - "Open Mic Night (Remix)" from Home Field Advantage (1999)
C-Rayz Walz - "The Lineup" from Ravipops (The Substance) (2003)
Prince Paul - "Not Tryin' to Hear That/Words (Album Leak) from Politics of the Business (2003)
Prince Paul - "Chubb Rock Please Pay Paul His $2200 You Owe Him (People, Places and Things)" from Politics of the Business (2003)
Tonedeff - "Quotables" from Archetype (2005)
Pumpkinhead - "Trifactor" from Orange Moon Over Brooklyn (2005)
Juggaknots - "Liar, Liar" and "Crazy 8's" from Use Your Confusion (2006)
Oh No - "Know Better" from Exodus into Unheard Rhythms (2006)
Marco Polo - "Wrong One" from Port Authority (2007)
Masta Ace - "Say Goodbye" from The Falling Season (2016)


== Filmography ==


=== Films ===
Freestyle: The Art of Rhyme (2000)


=== Television ===
The Lyricist Lounge Show (2000)


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Wordsworth discography at Discogs
Wordsworth at IMDbRusty Brito (born May 28, 1985) better known by his stage name J.R. Writer, is a Dominican American rapper and freestyle champion. He was also an affiliate of East Coast hip hop group The Diplomats.


== Career ==
Writer is from Harlem, New York. He has released one studio album and 15 mixtapes since 2003, having collaborated with Cassidy, Fred Money, Lloyd Banks, Tito Green, Ransom, Drag-On, Sen City, Paul Wall, T.W.O., Duke Da God, A-Money, Vado, Jae Millz, AraabMuzik and more. He released his debut album History in the Making in 2006, through Koch and Diplomat Records. The album peaked at number 25 on the Billboard 200 and at number 2 on both the Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums and Top Rap Albums, held from the top spot of both charts by Pimp C's Pimpalation.On February 23, 2014, Writer released a 13-track mixtape titled The Return of Greatness, which includes guest appearances from Styles P, Fat Trel, Vado, Hell Rell and Fred Money as well as production from Track Officialz, SpecX2, Butter Beats DBK, Razah, Myes William, Stat Five Ave, Stoopid On The Beat and Automatik Beatz.On March 18, 2014, Writer began a prison sentence at Ulster Correctional Facility in New York State.On January 26, 2019, Writer released a diss track aimed at Tory Lanez called "Head Shot". One month later, he released another titled "Run Tory Run".


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===


=== Mixtapes ===


=== Guest appearances ===


== References ==Wyatt Coleman, also known as Wyldfyer is an American music producer. He produced a promo album (from Jay-Z), The Black Album: Classik. He produced tracks for Nas's "Hip Hop Is Dead", and the collaboration between Nas and Jay-Z,  "Black Republican".
After producing the Nas hit "War is Necessary" which appears in the video game, Grand Theft Auto IV, Wyldfyer collaborated with Ludacris and Lil Wayne.


== Production discography ==


== Interviews ==
Tres Leches Radio- The Main Ingredient (With Music Producer Wyldfyer bit.ly/TLRWyld http://illroots.com/2007/04/09/featured-wyldfyre-2/ illRoots.com Interview with Wyldfyer]

"Exclusive Hip Hop News, Audio, Lyrics, Videos, Honeys, Wear, Sneakers, Download Mixtapes". hiphopgame.com. Retrieved 2016-03-15.
"Exclusive Hip Hop News, Audio, Lyrics, Videos, Honeys, Wear, Sneakers, Download Mixtapes". hiphopgame.com. Retrieved 2016-03-15.
"Exclusive Hip Hop News, Audio, Lyrics, Videos, Honeys, Wear, Sneakers, Download Mixtapes". hiphopgame.com. Retrieved 2016-03-15.
"Back Track – "Black Republican" by Nas ft. Jay Z & "I do it for Hip Hop" by Luda ft. Jay Z & Nas – Prod. by WyldFyer | iStandardProducers.com". istandardproducers.com. Retrieved 2016-03-15.
"producer-spotlight-its-all-about-wyldfyer/publisher=violatordjs.com". Retrieved 2016-03-15.
http://blog.istandardproducers.com/2011/10/wyldfire2/
"@Wyldfyer Talks Nas, Jay-Z, Biggie and Detox | NODFACTOR.COM". nodfactor.com. Retrieved 2016-03-15.
"Interview : Wyldfyer | Abcdr Du Son". Archived from the original on 2012-07-22. Retrieved 2016-03-15.
"25 Artists That Need To Be Heard: Wyldfyer | The Urban Daily". theurbandaily.com. 2 February 2012. Retrieved 2016-03-15.
"Wyldfyer Interview | The Production Port". Archived from the original on 2012-10-13. Retrieved 2016-03-15.


== References ==Marvin Bernard (born March 31, 1978), better known by his stage name Tony Yayo, is an American rapper. He was best known as a member of G-Unit, a hip hop group he formed with his childhood friends, 50 Cent and Lloyd Banks. Yayo released his debut studio album, Thoughts of a Predicate Felon, on August 30, 2005, which debuted at number two on the Billboard 200. After eighteen years of not releasing a sophomore follow-up, due to his association with G-Unit and later disbandment of the group in 2022, Yayo returned with The Loyal, which released on February 10, 2023.His stage name is derived from the 1983 film, Scarface, referencing the main character Tony Montana, and Yayo, the slang word for cocaine.


== Early life ==
Marvin Bernard was born on March 31, 1978, in Jamaica, a neighborhood in Queens, one of the five boroughs of New York City. His parents were Haitian immigrants; he was the youngest of three children. At age fifteen, he dropped out of school in the tenth grade and dealt drugs to support his family. A year later, his parents divorced. As a child, he met his lifelong friends, Lloyd Banks and 50 Cent.


== Career ==


=== G-Unit ===
After his release from prison on drug charges, the trio formed the group, G-Unit, and began working on music together. The first underground mixtape featuring Bernard (who now went under the stage name Tony Yayo), was 134 All Starz, released in late 2000, referencing his old street he grew up on. However, G-Unit went on a hiatus after 50 Cent was shot nine times and released from Columbia Records. Two years later, G-Unit continued releasing a number of mixtapes in the early 2000s, including 2002's 50 Cent is the Future, No Mercy, No Fear, and God's Plan.While Yayo was incarcerated in 2003, his comrade 50 Cent was granted his own record label, G-Unit Records after the success of his debut studio album Get Rich or Die Tryin', which was released that February; Yayo appears on the album's track, "Like My Style". 50 immediately signed G-Unit members Yayo and Lloyd Banks to the label, and eventually Young Buck was signed and added to the group as the official fourth member; Buck was later retraced as Yayo's temporary replacement due to his incarceration. From 2003 to 2010, most of G-Unit's artists (including Yayo) were distributed by Interscope Records. G-Unit released their debut studio album, Beg for Mercy, on November 14, 2003. It went on to sell over four million copies in the United States alone. The album was released during which time Yayo was still finishing a prison sentence on various charges, but he was still featured on the album and his face was also shown on the album cover. G-Unit's sophomore and final album, T.O.S: Terminate on Sight, was released on July 31, 2008, and went on to sell 102,000 copies in its first week.Due to issues between Yayo, 50 and Young Buck, G-Unit went under in 2014, but later reunited as a quintet with all original four members and a newly added Kidd Kidd. They only released two EPs, The Beauty of Independence (2014), and The Beast Is G Unit (2015), before 50 Cent publicly dissolved the group again in 2022.


=== Solo career ===
His career as a rapper was halted by his ongoing jail sentence at the time throughout early 2003 until mid-2004. With Yayo incarcerated, G-Unit and close friend Eminem began a campaign called "Free Yayo". He said that he was unaware of the attention the campaign was getting until he saw Eminem wearing a "Free Yayo" shirt on stage at the 2003 Grammy Awards, where he performed his 8 Mile theme song, "Lose Yourself".Though his appearances on numerous mixtapes throughout his jail time announced his return on a street level, it was not until the release of Lloyd Banks' "Ain't No Click" and its parent album, The Hunger for More (2004), which featured Yayo that the latter received widespread recognition. His solo career hype was followed up by his debut single, "So Seductive" featuring 50 Cent,
On August 30, 2005, Tony Yayo released his debut studio album, Thoughts of a Predicate Felon, debuting at number two on the Billboard 200 behind Kanye West's Late Registration. He also appeared on the track, "Fake Love", which made its way to the soundtrack for 50 Cent's acting debut, Get Rich or Die Tryin', which released that November.
Since 2007, Tony Yayo has confirmed that work was in progress for his second studio album. In 2009, Yayo and Lloyd Banks were released from Interscope due to disagreements between the two members, 50 Cent and their former label's co-founder, Jimmy Iovine.
On May 20, 2010, Yayo released the single, "Pass the Patron", once again featuring 50 Cent. The single's release was distributed by G-Unit Records and EMI Music Distribution (which is now known today as Virgin Music). On March 2, 2011, Yayo released another single called "Haters". The song features 50 Cent, Shawty Lo and Roscoe Dash. The single was released via the This Is 50 website after its premiere on Hot 97 through radio DJ Funkmaster Flex. The single rapidly started to gain success on the urban radio charts and soon debuted on the Billboard Hot R&B/Hip-Hop song chart at number one-hundred-twelve.
After twelve years on a hiatus, Yayo released his sophomore solo album and his first following his disaffiliation from 50 Cent and G-Unit, The Loyal, on February 10, 2023, exclusively on Apple Music, but it was later released on other competing streaming services four days later on Valentine's Day. Later in July, he released a mixtape titled the 134 Tape.


== Legal issues ==


=== Felony charges for weapon possession, bail jumping and forged passport; incarceration (2002–04) ===
Along with 50 Cent and several other affiliates, Yayo was arrested on December 31, 2002, during a New Year's Eve party in Midtown Manhattan for first-degree possession of a loaded firearm by a convicted felon. He had a Glock 20 handgun and a Colt AR-15 in the trunk of his car. When police discovered that Yayo had a prior 1996 conviction for drug possession and an outstanding warrant for a previous gun charge, Yayo was sentenced for bail jumping and spent a year in prison. Yayo served time in the Lakeview Shock Incarceration Correctional Facility in the village of Brocton in Chautauqua County, New York. He was paroled on January 8, 2004. The next day, he was arrested for possessing a forged passport and served time in federal prison until February 24, 2004.


=== Assault charge and dismissal (2007–08) ===
On March 24, 2007, Tony Yayo and childhood friend, Lowell Fletcher (alias Lodi Mack), were both arrested for the alleged simple assault on fourteen-year-old James Rosemond, Jr. (alias Lil Henchman), who is confirmed to be the son of Czar Entertainment founder and drug trafficker James Rosemond (alias Jimmy Henchman). The incident was perceived to have had a connection with Tony Yayo and G-Unit's ongoing dispute with former colleague and Henchman's client at the time, The Game. 50 Cent was also accused of approaching the child, along with members of his entourage, and pushing him against a nearby wall. However, he had proven his innocence with video footage showing him at his former Connecticut mansion at the time of the alleged incident. Yayo reportedly slapped the boy several times and yelled at him "fuck Czar Entertainment, nigga!" His co-conspirator, Fletcher, also pistol whipped Rosemond, Jr., and apparently threatened him with the same gun, causing the adolescent child to run off in fear.Tony Yayo made his first court appearance on the morning of April 25, 2007, in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of New York. The case was adjourned to July 24. Yayo plead not guilty to all charges. His lawyer has expressed his belief that Yayo is innocent and commented on the situation in an interview with MTV:

After a thorough investigation, I steadfastly and adamantly state to you that my client [Tony Yayo] did not slap anyone. I am hopeful that when [authorities] complete their investigation, they will come to the same conclusion. Marvin Bernard, as a father, understands the allegations and would never do anything to harm a child.
A week before his court appearance, on April 18, the house of Yayo's mother was struck with bullets. The attack is believed to be in retaliation for his assault and to be ordered by Jimmy Henchman as vengeance for assaulting his son. Yayo references the attack on the G-Unit song, "Straight Outta Southside" (2008).On July 24, 2007, Tony Yayo attended a court hearing regarding his alleged assault. The prosecution offered him a nine-month prison sentence if he pleaded guilty, which he rejected. Ultimately, prosecutors dropped all charges against him in February 2008. The mother of Rosemond's son sued him and 50 Cent two months later.Eventually, his friend, Lodi Mack, took legal responsibility for the action and pleaded guilty to aggravated assault with a weapon and unlawful gun possession in relation. He, in November 2007, was sentenced to two years and nine months in prison.


=== Murder of close friend and homicide attempts by Jimmy Henchman (2009–14) ===
After Yayo's friend, Lowell "Lodi Mack" Fletcher, was paroled in late-September 2009, Fletcher was murdered outside of a grocery store in the New York City borough of the Bronx. Also, there were numerous murder attempts on the lives of Tony Yayo and 50 Cent ordered by Jimmy Henchman, including an attempt to explode a "bulletproof" limousine with the two inside of it. These attempts were conspired as revenge for Yayo and Fletcher assaulting Rosemond's son. 50 responded by recruiting Atlanta gang members to place a dead rat on the doormat of Henchman's home in New York.In 2014, after a hung jury in a federal trial which charged Rosemond for drug trafficking, murder for hire, conspiracy to commit homicide and other related federal charges in connection to the murder of Yayo's friend, Lodi Mack, and continuing to run his criminal enterprise, he was found guilty of all charges and sentenced to life in prison.


== Legacy ==
Tony Yayo inspired American wrestler John Cena “You Can’t See Me” wrestling finishing taunt. John Cena admitted to this in an interview with Jimmy Fallon in 2022.


== Discography ==

Studio albumsThoughts of a Predicate Felon (2005)
The Loyal (2023)With G-UnitBeg for Mercy (with G-Unit) (2003)
T·O·S (Terminate on Sight) (with G-Unit) (2008)


== Filmography ==


== References ==


== External links ==

Tony Yayo at AllMusic
Tony Yayo at IMDbChristopher Francis Ries (born March 9, 1983), known professionally as Young Chris, is an American rapper. He rose to fame as one-half of the Philadelphia-based hip hop duo Young Gunz alongside rapper Neef Buck, which themselves were also apart of Philadelphia hip hop group State Property; both acts that were signed to Jay-Z's Roc-A-Fella Records in the early 2000s. 
With Young Gunz, the duo saw their greatest success with their 2003 debut single "Can't Stop, Won't Stop", which peaked at number sixteen on the Billboard Hot 100 and received a Grammy Award nomination for Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group. They subsequently released two albums: Tough Luv (2004) and Brothers from Another (2005). After long-term delay for his debut solo record, Ries signed to Rico Love's record label Division1, an imprint of Universal Motown Records in December 2010. He has since released two studio albums through the label: LIFE: Ladies In For Free and The Revival, both in 2011.
Ries is often confused with the rapper YC, who used to perform as "Yung Chris", and is thus sometimes incorrectly credited as the performer of the YC song "Racks".


== Music career ==


=== Young Gunz ===
Young Chris and Neef Buck (born Hanif Muhammad) had been friends since they were young boys on the block (C-Ave).  On "Takeover", a track from his 2001 album The Blueprint, Jay-Z announced the duo as "Chris & Neef".
In 2001, the duo performed on the State Property soundtrack album. Young Chris and Neef starred in the titular movie. Also during this period of their career, Young Chris appeared throughout Dame Dash's Dream Team compilation, and Beanie Sigel's The Reason. The duo performed together on guest appearances for albums like Jay-Z's The Blueprint 2, Freeway's Philadelphia Freeway, State Property's The Chain Gang Vol. 2, and Memphis Bleek's M.A.D.E.; all while recording their album. The Young Gunz scored their first hit with "Can't Stop, Won't Stop", the lead-off single from The Chain Gang Vol. 2 album.  Its song and video received major airplay on hip-hop radio, MTV2, and BET and reached No. 14 on the U.S. Billboard 200 chart and #6 on the Billboard Hot Rap Tracks chart.After the success of their single, "Can't Stop, Won't Stop", the label jumped and was ready to release their debut album, Tough Luv. It included the remix to "Can't Stop, Won't Stop", which featured St. Louis rapper Chingy. Singles included "No Better Love" featuring former Roc-A-Fella Records crooner Rell and the Just Blaze-produced "Friday Night". Tough Luv debuted on the Billboard 200 at No. 3 after selling 128,000 copies in its first week.  That week, the album at No. 2 was labelmate Kanye West's debut album The College Dropout, which was released just two weeks earlier.After a brief hiatus, the duo returned with Swizz Beatz produced "Set It Off" from their second album, Brothers from Another. It was the second release from the "new" Roc-A-Fella Records, referencing when Jay-Z became president of Def Jam Records, the first being Memphis Bleek's 534. The album debuted on the Billboard 200 at No. 15, and included guest features from Kanye West, Swizz Beatz, Slim of 112 and John Legend.


=== Solo career ===
As early as March 2006, Young Chris thought about recording a solo album. He initially titled it Now or Never. He stated to XXL magazine that he wanted to release a solo album by the end of 2008 and had been "95 percent done" by June 2008.  In this article, Young Chris also states that he himself up there with Lil' Wayne and Juelz Santana. Since this time, Chris has taken to the internet to solidify himself as a top solo artist, with his YoungChris.com Social Network, hitting the remix circuit, and his much anticipated "The Network" Mixtape series, hosted by DJ Don Cannon.In December 2010, Young Chris signed with Division1, a label started by songwriter/producer Rico Love, under the Universal Motown umbrella. Love considers Young Chris his flagship artist, working closely with Young Chris on his debut album and pre-album/mixtape. The mixtape, called "The Re-Introduction", was released on November 20, 2010. The aptly titled mixtape gives the spotlight to a newly signed Young Chris, as a solo artist, and also, re-introduces the combination of DJ Drama and Don Cannon, the former "Affiliates" partners, hosting their first mixtape together, in several years.On January 28, a song called "Philly Shit (Mega Mix)" featuring Young Chris, Eve, Black Thought, Money Malc, Fat Joe, Fred the Godson, Diggy Simmons, Jermaine Dupri & The Game was leaked. On March 22, 2011, Young Chris' single "A$$ets" was commercially released.In late 2013–2014, Young Chris began releasing a slew of freestyles, the latest being a reworking of Wale's "LoveHate Thing", released on May 6. He's currently working on a new studio album titled Alive.
On May 6, 2014, he released a mixtape on Datpiff called Gunna Seazon.


== Awards and nominations ==
"Can't Stop, Won't Stop" was nominated for Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group at the 46th Annual Grammy Awards.


== Discography ==
This is the singles and albums discography of Young Chris.


=== Young Chris ===
The Network 3 (2014)
Gunna Season (2014)
Vital Signs EP (2013)
Young Christmas (FrEP) (2011)
The Revival (2011)
L.I.F.E (Ladies in for Free) (2011)
The Re-Introduction (2010)
The Network 2 (2010)
30 Days 30 Verses (2009)
The Network (with Don Cannon) (2009)
Campaign for Change (2008)
Now or Never (with DJ Drama) (2008)
Young Chris-Mas (2007)
The Newprint (2007)
Politically Incorrect (2007)
Murder Capital (with Pooda Brown, Neef Buck and DJ LRM) (2007)
Hired Gun (2007)
Killadelphia – More Bodies Than Days (2007)
Young Chris (2007)


=== Young Gunz ===
Back to Business (2010)
Rapid Fire (2008)
Get In Where U Fit In Part 2 (2005)
Get In Where U Fit In (2004)
Brothers from Another (2005)
Tough Luv (2004)


=== State Property ===
The Chain Gang Vol. 2 (2003)
State Property (2002)


=== Mixtapes ===


=== Guest appearances ===


== See also ==
Young Gunz discography
State Property discography


== References ==


== External links ==
Young Chris official website
Division 1 website
Young Gunz official websiteKatorah Kasanova Marrero (born April 3, 1992), better known by her stage name Young M.A (acronym for Young Me. Always), is an American rapper. She first gained widespread recognition in 2016 with the release of the quadruple-platinum hit single "Ooouuu", breaking the top 20 of the Billboard Hot 100, boasting over 400 million YouTube views on the music video.After the success of her debut single, Young M.A was nominated for BET and MTV Artist of the Year and Female Hip-Hop Artist of the Year awards. She began appearing on magazine covers. She has been featured in global ad campaigns for Google Pixel 2, Beats By Dre and Pandora. She has appeared on a variety of television shows and performed alongside Alicia Keys on The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon.
In 2018, Young M.A was featured on the  Forbes 30 Under 30, the same year she launched the KWEENZ Foundation with her mother.


== Early life ==
Katorah Marrero was born on April 3, 1992, in Brooklyn, New York. Her mother is Jamaican, and her father is Puerto Rican. Her father was incarcerated when she was 1 and was not released until she was 11, spending approximately 10 years behind bars. With the absence of her father, Young M.A grew close to her brother, Kenneth Ramos, and her mother. When Marrero was 7, her mother decided to relocate to Chesterfield, Virginia, as it provided better school facilities and her children would remain away from the violence of East New York. In Virginia, she started to play tackle football. When she was 10, Young M.A started to write rhymes in her schoolbooks. Her mother encouraged her and purchased a karaoke machine, which M.A would set up as a makeshift studio in her closet. In 2010, she graduated from Sheepshead Bay High School.


== Career ==


=== Music ===
Young M.A raps about many of the same topics as male rappers, such as violence, sexuality, wealth, and acquisitions. She stated, "this industry is male-dominated, we can't pretend that it's not. So when you do make it as a female, you feel more honored, because the guys take over so much." When she was a child, Young M.A exhibited a passion for music. When she began seriously focusing on music as an adult, she self-funded a recording studio with local record producers while working at the Shake Shack and T.J. Maxx.In 2014, she gained notoriety when a Facebook post criticized her song "Brooklyn Chiraq", a freestyle to Nicki Minaj and G Herbo "ChiRaq"; the song then went viral. The post's author, pundit Boyce Watkins, said the song promoted "violent, negative, and genocidal energy", but the controversy expanded Young M.A's name recognition and brought new listeners to her work. In 2015, Young M.A released a new song, "Body Bag", which became a "YouTube hit", said Rolling Stone, along with the release of her mixtape called Sleep Walkin', which MTV described as a "thoughtful debut project".In 2016, Young M.A released her official debut single, "Ooouuu," which peaked at number 19 on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart. In September 2016, the song had nearly 7 million plays on Spotify and was widely remixed by other rappers and hip hop artists such as Remy Ma, French Montana, Nicki Minaj, Jadakiss, Uncle Murda, ASAP Ferg, Bryan Mathers and Tink, all of whom released their versions of the song. Stereogum's Tom Breihan said "Ooouuu" was "a brash, intense, hard-as-fuck piece of rider music... the song feels like it marks the arrival of a major rap talent." The Fader said Young M.A has "[established] herself as a quintessential New York MC", and MTV's Doreen St. Félix said, "This summer, the atmosphere belongs to Young M.A and her single 'OOOUUU.'" The song's popularity drew attention from labels, though M.A remains an independent artist.At the 2016 BET Hip Hop Awards, she performed a freestyle on a cypher and performed "Ooouuu", giving what XXL Magazine described as "show-stopping freestyle... one of the best freestyles of the night". Despite the enthusiasm for her performance, Young M.A expressed disappointment, saying BET cut out a portion of her performance. Remy Ma featured M.A at Hot 97's Summer Jam 2017, where she performed alongside other female rap greats. M.A was quoted as saying "There's been a lot of opportunities, and of course a lot of money, but then there's the downside: you lose a lot of people that were once around you once their true colors start to show".
Freestyles such as "Who Run It" and "I Get The Bag" have gained millions of online streams and views, along with her previous single, "Walk", which has amassed over 20 million listens. M.A's single titled "Praktice" is supposedly a reference to the idea that her previous releases have all led up to the full album. Young M.A's debut studio album Herstory in the Making was released on September 27, 2019, and peaked at number 16 on the Billboard 200. It included the singles "Big" and "PettyWap 2". On May 22, 2020, she released the EP Red Flu, marking her first new project since the release of her debut album. On May 21, 2021, she released her second studio album Off the Yak. Pitchfork rated the album 6.9 out of 10.


=== Other projects ===
In 2016, during an interview with Rolling Stone, Young M.A said Lee Daniels offered her the role of "Betty Bars" on the show Empire. The character and role were made especially for her, but she turned it down, preferring to pursue her career as a rapper on her terms and with her moniker instead of being known first as a fictional character. She references being offered the role in her freestyle "Check," rapping, "Shout out to Fox trying to get me on that Empire / At first I had to turn it down, wasn't up to par / 'Cause it's Young M.A, bitch! Fuck is 'Betty Bars'?"In 2018, she directed her first pornographic film, which was a lesbian porn film, produced by Pornhub, titled The Gift. In 2019, she also appeared in the fourth and final season of Mr. Robot as Peanuts, an employee of criminal Fernando Vera. In 2020, Young M.A appeared as the first feature on Eminem's surprise-released album Music to Be Murdered By on the song "Unaccommodating".


== Personal life ==
Young M.A has been open about her sexual orientation in her music throughout her career. During an interview with the  Breakfast Club, she stated that she has liked girls since the first grade. She told Vogue that coming out was an important point in her artistic development, stating "I held in being sexually attracted to women for so long that once I got that out of me, the music became easy."  As of 2019, she no longer likes to use any kind of label for herself; when Jason Lee of Hollywood Unlocked asked Young M.A about her orientation, the rapper stated, "No, I'm Young M.A . . . . We don't do no labels. I just wouldn't date a guy. Nah, bro, I don't like that."In an interview with The Breakfast Club, Young M.A stated that she often felt out of place when she was hiding her sexuality. Her mother would often try to get her to discuss her sexuality, but she would always deny she was a lesbian. She stated that she feared her mother wouldn't accept her if she came out. In the interview, she said, "I used to be scared to tell my moms, though I knew my moms wasn't the type of mother to be like 'Oh, I don't like you' or 'I'm gonna ignore you,' but part of me still was scared." Young M.A also said in a different interview, "I was scared to express it to people who are close to me, That was me not accepting it yet, even though I knew deep down in my heart that I liked women."
When she came out to her family at the age of 18, she saw this as a turning point in her rap career. She also said in an interview with Noisey Raps, "Since I came out officially, that's when all the girls flopped, that's when it was a wrap," she laughed. She also said people "feel her more" because she's more comfortable. To continue, another time she said, "Once I became myself, the music was a wrap. Music is my expression. Music is my release. Music is my therapy. This is where I’m going to speak about my sexuality. I’ve held it in for so long, now I can express it."Marrero revealed that growing up in New York City helped her accept herself and sexuality. The rapper stated, "In New York City, it’s popular. I used to think to myself, man, there’s a lot of gay people out there. And it makes me comfortable, it was like, I can be myself! I used to still try to hide it until it was overwhelming — there were just too [many] girls attracted to me!" However, even though she is open about being a lesbian, she doesn't want it to define her as an artist.On September 26, 2009, Young M.A's brother, Kenneth Ramos, was stabbed to death by his former friend. Young M.A missed school for a month due to depression and mourning, and later underwent therapy to deal with the tragedy.


== Philanthropy ==


=== KWEENZ Foundation ===
Young M.A is the founder of the KWEENZ Foundation. KWEENZ foundation "helps those residing in her East New York neighborhood overcome the grief and trauma that comes with the loss of a loved one." "It’s for women and for men—Kings and Queens…KWEENZ," she says. "I got my mother involved because she sadly lost her son, my brother, in 2009 and this is something for her to get into and give her a little relief and meet other mothers who have been in that situation so they’re not alone." Regarding the vicissitudes of life, Young M.A said, "No matter how much success you have in this life, you still go through those struggles and still go through that pain."


== Television appearances ==
Young M.A appears regularly at the end of Vice News Tonight (on HBO) episodes critiquing many genres of music.
She has also appeared on the Wendy Williams Show, The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon, Viceland's The Therapist, Snoop Dogg's GGN, MTV's Ridiculousness, Hip Hop Squares, Martha & Snoop's Potluck Dinner Party, Wild 'n Out, Safeword, Total Request Live and Mr. RobotOn October 28, 2019, Young M.A appeared as a guest on Angela Yee's Lip Service.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===


=== Mixtapes ===


=== Extended plays ===


=== Singles ===


==== As lead artist ====


==== As featured artist ====


=== Other charted songs ===


=== Guest appearances ===


== Awards and nominations ==


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official websiteYoung Music DYMG is an American DJ, songwriter and record producer. He initially gained recognition as the official DJ for Washington, D.C.-based singer Ginuwine at the age of 16. He is the youngest artist to sign a worldwide distribution deal with E1 Music.


== Career ==


=== Disc Jockey ===
Young Music began deejaying at the age of 12. In 2011, his uncle, Ginuwine, hired Young Music to open for him at shows in 40 cities across the United States. In 2015, he became the youngest DJ to be added to the CBS Radio owned WPGC-FM roster. In August of that same year, he toured with Chris Brown on the North American leg of the One Hell of a Nite Tour. Later that year, he joined Duane Myko and Tony Redz on the 30 city, "Should Could Dream Tour" which was co-sponsored by Revolt TV and WPGC. Following the conclusion of the tour, Young Music performed guest DJ sets on Sway in the Morning as well as Revolt TV. As of November 2016, Young Music had mix shows on WPGC 95.5 FM in Washington, DC, E93 WEAS in Savannah, GA, WDKX 103.9 FM in Savannah, GA, WDAI 98.5 KISS in Myrtle Beach, SC and Coast 97.3 in Wilmington, NC. In 2018 he signed an exclusive international radio syndication deal with "Radio Express International" for all territories outside of the United States. The deal is for his radio shows, "Streetz Slow Lane" and "Streetz Fast Lane." In September 2018 he formed his own national radio syndication company, "DJ Young Music LLC." The company serves his combined 30 weekly markets with his two formatted self-produced programs.


=== DYMG ===
In 2015 Young Music signed a development deal with N.S.U.C. Entertainment Group, distributed by E1 Distribution. The deal gave Young Music full development rights to release music, films and soundtracks under his label, DYMG. The first song that he released was "Pull Up On The Block" which featured Billboard charting artist, iLoveMemphis. By the end of that year, Young Music signed DMV based artists, Ant Glizzy and SHADE. In October 2018, Young Music released a single entitled HeHe which featured Rich The Kid.


=== SUPER RADIO ===
In 2016 Young Music signed with Super Radio making him the youngest DJ to join their network. This deal expanded his weekly audience to an estimated 30 million listeners.


== References ==


== External links ==
DJ Young Music Official WebsiteRichard "Younglord" Frierson (born July 9, 1978) is an American Grammy-nominated hip hop and R&B record producer.
In 2014, Frierson founded The Truth Licensing, a major provider of music for Films, TV shows, and commercial ads.


== Career ==
A native of New York City, he was signed in November 1994, at the age of sixteen, to Puff Daddy's Hitmen Production Team [1] producing for the label's roster including Mase, The Lox, Faith Evans and 112. He has since produced for outside acts such as Virtue, DMX, Lloyd Banks, Veronica, New Edition and Consequence. Most recently his success was with the Diddy comeback single "Come to Me", which reached Number 9 on The U.S. Billboard Hot 100 Singles Sales co-produced by Yakubu "Jai" Izuagbe also known as Rebel.


=== Frierson: The Talent Scout ===
Frierson was also partly responsible for the now infamous producer Ryan Leslie's meeting with P. Diddy after Leslie was given a 30-day contract as a music production intern for Frierson. When the two producers created the Beyoncé Knowles song "Keep Giving Your Love To Me" for the Bad Boys 2 soundtrack, Ryan was asked to meet P. Diddy.Frierson conceptualized an incubator system for artists, allowing creative space for growth for up and coming artists and producers. Finding such talent such as Terry "MaddScientist" Thomas (a pseudonym inspired by Nicole Scherzinger's single "Supervillain") and Atozzio, he helped guide and prepare them up to the point where they would be able to sign a publishing deal with EMI Music Publishing.
Identifying and supporting burgeoning artists has been a crucial factor for Frierson. After speaking at lectures at Berklee College of Music, Frierson met Keith Harris, guiding him to LA, where he eventually became Production Partner for Black Eyed Peas' Will I Am, working on two of the last Black Eyed Peas albums, and also working on Estelle's hit single, "American Boy". Chris Henderson, another talent under Frierson's wings, went on to write the hit record "Blame It" by Jamie Foxx, and has written for R&B hit man R. Kelly.


=== License To Rock ===
In 2014, Frierson founded The Truth Music Licensing [2]. The Truth controls a catalog of over 5,000 songs and has licensed music to major movie studios, networks, and high-profile brands.
License To Rock is the rebranding of The Truth Music Library. This rebranding consists of a major expansion and a partnership with a high profile music label. These changes put LTR in position to build a massive catalog and become a dominant force in the licensing space. Some of License To Rock's placements have been with Mona Scott's "Love & Hip Hop" franchises, Lee Daniels' "STAR" & "EMPIRE" and commercials for brands including Gatorade, Pepsi, and AT&T. 


== Discography ==


=== 1990s ===


=== 2000s ===


=== 2010s ===
2010: Big Tunes: Destination Dance


== References ==


== External links ==
Younglord on Myspace
Younglord discography at Discogs
Younglord at RateYourMusic
Younglord at AllMusicNathan Isaac Zand (born December 11, 1981), also known as Nosson Zand, is an American Chasidic rapper from Boston, Massachusetts.


== Biography ==
Zand was born in Brookline, Massachusetts, on December 11, 1981. He is best known by  his Hebrew name Nosson.
Growing up in Brookline, he went to Brookline High School, where he took trumpet lessons and was exposed to rap by a friend from the projects. They spent their school days rapping in the halls, on the street, at parties, talent shows and open mic events. His first show was at the House of Blues in Cambridge, Massachusetts. He then entered Clark University where he studied French language and U.S. history.
He performed on campus with Toots and the Maytals, Heather B, The LastPoets and multiple solo gigs.
Upon graduating, he went to live and work in France where he worked as an English teacher. In France he met some Hasidic Jews  from the Chabad movement, and liked their way of life. He then started a new style which he called "Chasidic rap", in which he aimed to present lyrics with a positive message.
He performed at night clubs and other venues throughout France. In 2004 he returned to Boston, where he worked odd jobs and played gigs in Boston, New York City, Florida and Texas.
In a chance encounter in Boston he met Matisyahu and rapped for him. Matisyahu then asked Nosson to perform with him on Avalon, California and in South Paw in Brooklyn, New York.After further gigs and performance with Matisyahu, in 2007 he went to Hollywood to play the lead role in Song of David a movie about a young Hasid who is studying to become a rabbi in a Los Angeles yeshiva. Alienated by the social boundaries that enclose him, he reaches out to the broader world. He becomes obsessed with rap music, wherein he discovers artistic freedom and honest self-expression. He then must choose between diverging worlds. With this film Nosson won the "Best Actor Award" at the Boston International Film Festival.

In 2008 he completed his first EP The Return and performed with Matisyahu on a 35 city tour of US and Canada, including at Matisyahu's 8-show "Festival of Light" in New York City, the name of which is a reference to the Jewish Festival of Lights.In 2013, Zand released his first full-length album "Believers", which includes a song of the same name featuring Matisyahu. It is available on Spotify, iTunes and Google Play. He has also made a music video of his song featuring Matisyahu and posted it on YouTube.


== Discography ==


=== EPs ===
The Return EP (2008)
Brick Windows EP (2017)


=== Albums ===
Believers  (2013)


=== Singles ===
"Fresh (My People Stay)" (2006)
"Tree of Life" (ft. Prodezra) (2010)
"It's Gone" (ft. J-Red) (2011)
"No Celebrity" (2012)
"All For You" (2012)
"Bound Up" (2013)
"Our Type of Party" (ft. J-Red) (2013)
"Believers" (ft. Matisyahu) (2013)
”I’m So Different” (2017)
”Bobby Brown” (2017)
”Drug$ Are Gone” (2017)
”So Long” (2017)
”A-Game” (2017)
”I Moved To Miami” (2017)
”Hill Street Blues” (2017)
”Keep It Cool” (2017)
”On My Way” (2017)
”I Feel So Good” (2017)
”One-n-the Same” (2017)
”What’s It Gonna Be Like” (2017)
”The Prince” (2018)
”Lost Object” (2018)
”Sounds Lubavitch but Okay” (2018)
”Will You Marry Me?” (2018)
“Memories” (2018)
”Here We Come” (2018)
”Taking Back the Music” (2019)
”I Don’t Know You” (2019)
”Know That I Love You” (2020)
"Quarantined Free$tyle" (2020)
"Daylight" (2021)
"Something To Live For" (2021)
"Be Without" (2021)


== References ==Junius Donald Rogers, professionally known as ZillaKami, is an American rapper, singer, and songwriter. He is a member of the hip hop duo City Morgue and a former songwriter for 6ix9ine.He has been noted by publications such as HotNewHipHop as a pioneer of trap metal. Rogers is the CEO of Dog Years Skate Club, a skate apparel and equipment brand.


== Biography ==
Rogers was born in Bay Shore, New York. In his teens, Rogers formed a punk rock band called Scud Got Quayle, with some of his friends from school, influenced by the sound of Gorilla Biscuits. His involvement in hip hop music began by ghostwriting for fellow New York rapper 6ix9ine. During this period, he wrote a song which he intended to feature two vocalists, to which 6ix9ine responded by telling him that he should feature on the track, which would eventually be released under the name "Yokai", and the pair followed up with by releasing another collaborative track called "Hellsing Station". However, in August 2017, the pair had a falling out when Rogers posted a photo of 6ix9ine engaging in a sexual act with a girl that he claimed was thirteen, and bringing to light his prior guilty plea to using a child in a sexual performance.
On April 30, 2017, he released his debut EP "LifeIsAHorrorMovie", which he later took down due to him no longer feeling a connection with the music that it contained.Soon after, ZillaKami got in contact with the son of the owner of the tattoo parlor that his older brother Righteous P worked at, who went by the stage name SosMula. A few days after his release from prison on drug charges, SosMula formed City Morgue with ZillaKami. In August 2018, after numerous singles scattered throughout the couple years before, they released their debut EP as a group, titled "Be Patient".On September 5, 2018, he featured on the track "Vengeance" from Denzel Curry's third album Ta13oo, which also featured JPEGMafia, which was followed, in the same month, by a feature on Lil Gnar's track "Man Down". On October 12, 2018, City Morgue released their debut album "City Morgue Vol 1: Hell or High Water", and soon after, their headline tour in support of it sold out. On November 29, 2018, he featured on Powers Pleasant's track "Please Forgive", along with Jay IDK, Zombie Juice and Denzel Curry. From July 24 to August 23, he joined Suicideboys' Grey Day tour as a part of City Morgue, along with Turnstile, Denzel Curry, Trash Talk, Pouya, Germ, Shoreline Mafia and Night Lovell. On December 13, 2019, City Morgue released their second album City Morgue Vol 2: As Good as Dead. The deluxe version of said album, featuring several new tracks, was released on May 15, 2020. On July 31, 2020, City Morgue released their mixtape Toxic Boogaloo. On October 15, 2021, City Morgue released their third studio album City Morgue Volume 3: Bottom of the Barrel On September 17, 2021, Rogers released his debut solo album Dog Boy.  On September 15, 2023, they released their final studio album which was called "My Bloody America". This album was the last one that City Morgue worked on as a duo.


== Musical style and influence ==
ZillaKami's music has been described as merging elements of hardcore punk and heavy metal with trap music, by incorporating electric guitars and guttural shouted vocals and aggressive lyrical themes. His lyrics often depict themes of extreme violence, death, masochism and drug-use. In an article by Complex magazine, writer Jacob Moore described his music as "the most merciless rap music since Necro".He cites his biggest influences as Title Fight's albums Floral Green and Hyperview, DMX, as well as Radiohead's album In Rainbows and Onyx.


== Discography ==

Studio albumsExtended plays


=== Guest appearances ===
6ix9ine – "Yokai" (2016)
6ix9ine – "Hellsing Station" (2016)
$ubjectz – "GangShit" feat. Cameronazi (2017)
$ubjectz – "War Paint" feat. Cameronazi (2017)
ITSOKTOCRY – "SHINIGAMISTARSHIP" (2017)
Cameronazi – "AREYOUREADYKIDS?" feat. $ubjectz (2017)
Cameronazi – "Squad Up" (2017)
Cameronazi – "Devil Horns" (2017)
Saint Poncho – "FVKKK" (2017)
XZARKHAN – "Jungle Klipped" (2017)
BROC $TEEZY – "Want Em Dead" feat. fl.vco and KXNG (2018)
Yadrin – "Demonscall" (2018)
Yadrin – "BHUM BUKKET RMX" feat. SosMula (2018)
Stoney – "Runnin'" (2018)
BurnKas – "Red Rum" (2018)
Denzel Curry – "VENGEANCE" feat. JPEGMafia (2018)
Lil Gnar – "Man Down" (2018)
Powers Pleasant – "Please Forgive" feat. Jay IDK, Zombie Juice and Denzel Curry (2018)
Danon The Producer – "Shootinphotos" (2018)
DrownMili – "Kid Soulja" feat. BurnKas (2018)
ESKIIIS – "I Solemnly Swear" (2018)
RAMIREZ – "BAPHOMET / MOSH PIT KILLA" (2019)
POUYA and CITY MORGUE – "Bulletproof Shower Cap" (2019)
Denzel Curry – "EVIL TWIN" (2020)
NYCL KAI – "Incredible" feat. $NOT (2020)
IC3PEAK – "TRRST" (2020)
DJ Scheme- "Thor's Hammer Worthy" (2020)
Trippie Redd – "DEAD DESERT" feat. Scarlxrd (2021)
SosMula – "Boogaloo" (2021)
Jeris Johnson – "RAINING BLOOD" (2022)
ONI and CITY MORGUE - "War Ender" (2022)


== References ==William Michael Coleman (born July 8, 1992), professionally known as Mike Zombie, is an American record producer and rapper from Willingboro Township, New Jersey. Since 2012, Coleman has been an in-house producer for Drake's label OVO Sound. His biggest production for the label is "Started from the Bottom" in 2013. His other major production credit is "They Don't Love You No More" by DJ Khaled, released a year later.


== Career ==
He is best known for the production of Drake's single "Started from the Bottom". He sampled a track titled "Ambessence piano & drones 1" by Bruno Sanfilippo & Mathias Grassow for the song. "Started from the Bottom" was the winner of "Track of the Year" at the 2013 BET Hip Hop Awards. The song was played during NBA All-Star Weekend, LeBron James' "LeBron Face" Sprite commercial", video game NBA 2K14, and video game Assassin's Creed 4. The song was also nominated for "Best Rap Song" at The 56th Annual Grammy Awards. In July 2013, BET named him one of the "top 10 young producers to watch out for". In October 2013, Complex named him one of the "25 new producers to watch for".
He previously collaborated with battle rapper Hollow Da Don and Hollow played an important part putting Drake in contact with Mike Zombie.Zombie released his first mixtape, The End of the Beginning, on December 22, 2013. Recently he produced DJ Khaled's song "They Don't Love You No More" featuring Meek Mill, Rick Ross, Jay-Z and French Montana. In the summer of 2014 he released his first music video from "The End of the Beginning" "616" on MTV Jams. On January 27, 2015 Zombie released a new project called "Rebel Without a Cause". In 2016, he dropped a few singles and two projects: "Humble Genius" (July 1, 2016) and a collaborate album with Benzi Ayo "Ea$tside Story" (October 1, 2016). In 2019, Zombie produced a song for The Game titled "A.I. With The Braids" featuring Lil Wayne.


== Discography ==


=== Mixtapes ===
The End of the Beginning (2013)
Rebel Without a Cause (2015)
Humble Genius (2016)
Eastside Stories (with Benzi Ayo) (2016)
20GREATEEN (2018)
The Silver Tape (2019)


=== Guest appearances ===


=== Production discography ===


== References ==